Alliance Candidates 2026 | Electorate Candidates NZ

 Skip to main content

 Candidates

 Meet the Alliance candidates standing for working people in local communities and across Aotearoa.

 9 confirmed candidates

 Meet the candidates

 Alliance candidates are accountable to members, rooted in their communities, and campaigning for public ownership, workers' rights, affordable housing, and genuine Treaty partnership.

 Volunteer

 Christchurch Central electorate

 Greg Byrnes

 Alliance candidate for Christchurch Central

 2026 NZ General Election

 Spokesperson
 Environment

 Greg is a professional environmentalist and former Environment Canterbury Regional Councillor. He was born in Christchurch in 1960, where he also started his career as a horticulturalist, and is a father to three and...

 View Christchurch Central candidate

 Ilam electorate

 Courtney Fraser

 Alliance candidate for Ilam

 2026 NZ General Election

 Courtney is a full-time law student and worker who understands firsthand the financial pressures facing everyday New Zealanders. Currently working more than 20 hours a week while pursuing her degree, Courtney is well aware...

 View Ilam candidate

 Banks Peninsula electorate

 Kyle Turnbull

 Alliance candidate for Banks Peninsula

 2026 NZ General Election

 Spokesperson
 Transport

 Kyle is a long-term local resident who has lived in Christchurch for 30 years and currently lives within the Banks Peninsula electorate. He holds a Master's Degree in Spatial Analysis for Public Health from...

 View Banks Peninsula candidate

 Christchurch East electorate

 Ethan Gullery

 Alliance candidate for Christchurch East

 2026 NZ General Election

 Spokesperson
 Health

 Ethan works as an Operational Planning Business Partner for Health New Zealand - Te Whatu Ora and previously served as a Senior Data Analyst with the Health Quality and Safety Commission - Te Tāhū...

 View Christchurch East candidate

 Wellington North electorate

 Josh Harford

 Alliance candidate for Wellington North

 2026 NZ General Election

 Josh Harford is a lifelong Wellingtonian working in the hospitality sector. A committed progressive, he is passionate about support for working people and constitutional reform. He believes Wellington has been neglected by successive governments,...

 View Wellington North candidate

 Selwyn electorate

 Jesse Luke

 Alliance candidate for Selwyn

 2026 NZ General Election

 Jesse is a labourer and staunch trade unionist working in distribution. Born in Christchurch in 2000, Jesse has lived in Rolleston for the last seven years and taken an interest in local politics and...

 View Selwyn candidate

 Dunedin electorate

 Victor Billot

 Alliance candidate for Dunedin

 2026 NZ General Election

 Leadership
 Party Leader

 Alliance candidate for Dunedin, Victor Billot, is the newly elected Leader of the Alliance Party. Billot is a long-time resident of Dunedin and works as the National Communications Officer for the Maritime Union of...

 View Dunedin candidate

 Taieri electorate

 Anna Knight

 Alliance candidate for Taieri

 2026 NZ General Election

 Alliance candidate for Taieri, Anna Knight, is a professional translator and local advocate who was elected as Deputy Chairperson to the Waikouaiti Coast Community Board in 2025.

 View Taieri candidate

 West Coast-Tasman electorate

 Sara Dyatlova–Murphy

 Alliance candidate for West Coast-Tasman

 2026 NZ General Election

 Sara is a software developer, community advocate, and mother standing for the Alliance in West Coast-Tasman. Born and raised in Nelson with personal and family roots in Golden Bay, Motueka, Riwaka, and the West...

 View West Coast-Tasman candidate

 Together, we can build a fairer Aotearoa New Zealand. 

 No corporate donors. No hidden agendas. Just people who believe we can do better. 

 Join The Alliance