NZ First announces former mayor as West Coast candidate | RNZ
Skip to main content

29 March 2026, 4:43pm

NZ First announces former mayor as West Coast candidate
Russell Palmer

Caption:Buller's Jamie Cleine will run for election for NZ First, the party has announced.Photo credit:RNZ / Nate McKinnon
New Zealand First has revealed former Buller mayor Jamie Cleine will stand for the party in the West Coast-Tasman electorate, in November's general election.

Cleine lost the mayoralty in the October local elections after six years in the job, during which he led work on a plan to relocate Westport over decades, in the face of climate change.

Ratepayers rout mayors who imposed big rises

He has been a dairy and livestock farmer for 26 years.

The candidate announcement comes alongside a policy announcement NZ First wants half of the royalties from mining returned to the region it was mined from, through targeted investment, including in local infrastructure and housing.

This would come alongside revised rules for where mining can occur, longer-term mining permits, and investment in geological surveying technology.

Meanwhile, they would also curb the ability of the Department of Conservation to intervene by prioritising protection for areas of high conservation only, and "streamlining" timeframes for the agency, with the proviso of ensuring protection for "genuinely endangered species".

This would be achieved through changes to the Conservation and Wildlife Acts.

Sign up for Ngā Pitopito Kōrero, a daily newsletter curated by our editors and delivered straight to your inbox every weekday.

29 March 2026, 4:43pm

Related stories
Outgoing Buller mayor cries as he talks about risks facing town

Buller mayor devastated at potential loss of air connection

Mayor doubles down on ‘media protocol’

Councillor 'absolutely disgusted' at lack of progress on Westport flood protection

Westport accountant loses defamation case against Buller Mayor

Plan to relocate Westport to prevent flooding considered

More Politics
View all Politics articles
A contempt of privilege: Parliament's Clerk explains

'We can do a whole lot more': NZ-Canada trade announcement coming soon, minister says

MAPAS review hasn't proven scheme is 'clear case of racial discrimination' - Seymour

ACT promises to axe millions in roadside art spending

More News
View RNZ homepage
The Lindsay Clancy case looks tragically like NZ's Lauren Dickason trial. Here's where they differ.

Qantas flight diverted to Christchurch after 'engine issue'

More than half of KiwiSaver hardship applicants directed to other options

Chinese national rescued from Nepal tunnel a day after 2 Nepalis pulled out alive