10-year plans to strengthen health and education - Opportunity Party

 Support our September Fundraiser and help change New Zealand politics for good.

 10-year plans to strengthen health and education

 Opportunity will seek 10-year, cross-party plans for health and education, to build the front-line public services New Zealanders deserve, if elected to Parliament in 2026.

“New Zealanders expect better from politicians when it comes to health and education,” Opportunity Leader Qiulae Wong says.

“Everyone should get healthcare when they need it. Parents should be able to trust that their children are getting a great education. There’s every reason to believe we can achieve that in a country like ours. 

“But our health and education systems are under immense pressure because we keep changing tack with every change of government, putting political point-scoring above long-term progress. Meanwhile our young people and our most vulnerable people suffer.

“We have thousands of skilled, dedicated people working incredibly hard every day to deliver the best healthcare and education they can. They deserve to be backed with the stability, support and long-term direction they need to succeed,” says Wong.

Opportunity will use its leverage as a party willing to work across the political spectrum to bring all political parties together and develop the 10-year plans collaboratively, along with health and education professionals, communities and the people who use the services.

“The plans will set clear goals, identify who is responsible for delivering them, and measure progress so we can see what’s working and improve what isn’t.

“Planning a decade in advance gives us time to develop the workforce, invest properly in infrastructure and systems and make changes that genuinely improve New Zealanders’ lives.

"In health, success means fewer people getting sick, more equitable access to healthcare, less pressure on our emergency departments, and a health workforce that isn't constantly under pressure.

"In education, it means children developing the skills to succeed in the modern world, a supported teaching profession, and a system parents can trust.

“New Zealand has the people and the capability to build excellent health and education systems. Our job is to give them a clear direction, back them properly and stick with it long enough to deliver better outcomes,” says Wong.

 All,

 Press Releases

 -->

 Do you like this page?

 Tweet

 -->

 Join
 Volunteer
 Donate

 Thanks for signing up.

 We'll keep you up to date with Opportunity news, events, and updates.

 Please check your e-mail for a link to activate your account.

 Explore more

 Become a member

 10-year plans to strengthen health and education

 10-year plans to strengthen health and education

 New Zealand was built on the courage to change. It's time to change again.

 Sign in to your account

 Sign in

 or click here to create an account