About - The Opportunity Party

 Support our September Fundraiser and help change New Zealand politics for good.

 Opportunity for all

 There used to be a deal in New Zealand.

 If you worked hard, you could earn a life full of opportunity.

 But somewhere along the way, that deal was broken.

 We exist to rebuild it.

 Politics is broken.
So let's fix it.

 Our communities can't keep waiting for the courage, co-operation, and long-term solutions we expect from our leaders. It's frustrating and exhausting.

 It's time for a political circuit breaker. A new generation of politicians who can work constructively with the 'left' and 'right' sides of politics - so that every Kiwi benefits.

 At Opportunity, we come from all walks of life. We are students and grandparents, entrepreneurs and teachers, recent arrivals and established families, renters and homeowners.

 But none of us is a career politician.

 Free from ideological and party baggage, we won't flip-flop on critical policy every three years, or kick our slow-burn crises down the road again and again.

 Instead, we'll go to Wellington to do the hard stuff. Working honestly at the root causes of our big issues with an eye to the next 30 years, not the next three.

 We're standing to rebuild trust in politics, so together we can build the next economy - a future where fairness, wealth, and nature grow together.

 That's what we expect for New Zealand.

 If you expect better too - then party vote Opportunity.

 What we stand for

 Honesty first

 We'll be clear with Kiwis about complex issues and trade-offs. Because we can't build opportunity for all on half-truths, slogans, or avoidance.

 No too-hard basket

 We do system change - the big hard stuff that matters like tax, superannuation, or climate action. Because the next generation needs us to act now.

 Build trust every day

 Change only happens at the speed of trust. So we'll lead with integrity and hold spaces (like Citizens' Assemblies) to rebuild Kiwis' trust in politics.

 Opportunity for all

 We work to make New Zealand a place where no-one gets left behind and all of us play a role.

 Frequently Asked Questions

 Will you go into a coalition with Labour or National?

 We'll work with either Labour or National.

 Because New Zealand doesn't need another left-wing or right-wing party right. We need a new, constructive force in Parliament that brings stability and long-term thinking back to politics. That's us.

 Our coalition partner preference will depend on each party's policy platforms, but either can hold both sides to account. In short, we'll keep National honest on the environment and Labour honest on the economy.

 We'll also be really clear about the policy positions we won't compromise on - so everyone knows our bottom lines before we enter negotiations.

 Should I give you my electorate or party vote?

 Vote for Opportunity with your party vote.

 Our strategy to enter Parliament is via the 5% party-vote threshold. This year's election opinion polling indicates we are well on track.

 So, if you support our policies and think New Zealand needs a new era of stable, future-focused politics, then a party vote for Opportunity is the way to make that happen.

 What kind of policies do you have?

 Our policies are grouped around three interconnected pillars:

 Unity - fixing politics

 Innovation - building the next economy

 Nature - restoring the natural world

 We are a blue-green party - our colour is teal for a reason. We believe in a world in which industry and nature can grow together. But we're not there yet, so we have to innovate and invent the businesses of the future that can grow wealth, strong communities, and nature at the same time.

 We see divisive, pendulum politics as the main barrier to that future, so we're also standing to fix politics by strengthening our democracy, hearing the voice of citizens, and playing a constructive MMP kingmaker role in Parliament.

 Have you stood in an election before?

 Yes, we have. This will be the fourth election we'll stand in. Here are the results from the last few:

 2017 - 2.4% of the vote, with 21 electorate candidates

 2020 - 1.5% of the vote, with 21 electorate candidates

 2023 - 2.2% of the vote, with 13 electorate candidates

 This time around, we're currently polling at 4.6% in the June 1 News-Verian poll, and we have 43 electorate candidates.

 What are your bottom lines in a coalition negotiation?

 It is too early in the campaign to draw bottom lines, but our focus is clear: abundant renewable energy, a nature-restoring blue economy, a tax reset, a breakthrough economy, and participative democracy through citizens' assemblies.

 We will work hard to find common ground, but we will not compromise on our values and integrity just to be in Government.

 Join
 Volunteer
 Donate

 Thanks for signing up.

 We'll keep you up to date with Opportunity news, events, and updates.

 Please check your e-mail for a link to activate your account.

 Explore more

 Become a member

 About

 About

 New Zealand was built on the courage to change. It's time to change again.

 Sign in to your account

 Sign in

 or click here to create an account