Abundant Energy - The Opportunity Party

 Support our September Fundraiser and help change New Zealand politics for good.

 layout:wide

 -->

 INNOVATION

 Abundant Energy

 We need affordable, clean and abundant power. It's time for a long-term energy
 strategy.

 New Zealand is an energy-rich country. But we act like we're energy-poor.

 We have world-leading solar, wind, hydro and geothermal resources — but we still spend
 over $20 billion a year buying fossil fuels. That shows up in ever-increasing power
 bills, idled machinery in Kiwi businesses and geopolitical risk that we just can't
 afford anymore.

 We can do better.

 Abundant Energy is a circuit breaker for an energy system that has been underfunded
 for decades. This package of large scale investment, market reform and community &
 household level electrification will deliver clean, affordable energy — keeping our
 homes warm and our businesses running.

 Go electric at home and you're $3,200 a year better off. Solar on the roof, a car you
 charge in the driveway, a heat pump you can afford to leave on.

 What will Abundant Energy deliver?

 $500 – $2,700 in savings per year for the average family based on cheaper
 electricity bills and household electrification.

 5,000 extra high-skilled jobs over the next 30 years.

 300% more renewable electricity generation capacity (up to 30 Gigawatts by 2050).

 0.35% more annual GDP growth (based on processing, manufacturing and transport
 efficiencies and new opportunities).

 Significant cuts to carbon emissions from energy and industrial processes.

 Warmer, drier homes for Kiwis.

 How will Abundant Energy work?

 To deliver affordable, clean energy for Kiwi families and businesses, Abundant Energy
 will:

 Boost renewable generation by securing cross-party agreement to add
 30GW to the grid by 2050, launching a capacity investment scheme (like Australia
 has) to unlock capital and incentivising industries to electrify their processes.

 Make the electricity market work for Kiwis by ringfencing
 Government profits from power generation for investment in the renewable future,
 merging the four energy regulatory agencies into one and consolidating the 29 energy
 distributors into no more than 8.

 Electrify houses, communities and businesses by issuing
 low-interest loans for household electrification, funding community-run energy
 projects, insulating Kiwi homes and electrifying public transport systems.

 The wind and the sunlight are already here, and nobody sends us an invoice for them.

 Read our full policy paper

 Download the full policy paper
 Download PDF 

 Frequently Asked Questions

 How much will Abundant Energy cost?

 The operational expenditure for implementing this plan will all come from the
 ringfenced dividend revenue from the Government's ownership stake in the gentailers;
 currently around $500 million annually. This will take this funding away from core
 crown revenue, so represents a direct cost that will need to be funded through other
 revenue sources; like the land value tax. A full breakdown of estimated costs is
 available in the full policy document.

 What about grid stability?

 The main source of grid stability in our proposal comes from overbuilding renewables;
 having more renewable capacity available than current grid needs. This means that
 variable renewable sources like wind and solar can be used ahead of hydro. Leaving
 water in the dams provides a reserve of highly responsive generation capacity.
 Additional geothermal and hydro capacity will add to this.

 Distributed generation and storage at household and community level does not address
 broader "dry year" stability issues, but builds overall grid resilience and could
 enable some peak shifting. Grid-scale storage further supports peak-shifting. Thermal
 generation at Huntly will still be available as a backup option; but it will be used
 in true emergency scenarios, rather than as a routine part of the generation mix.

 Will you separate the gentailers?

 No. Structural separation is a lengthy and costly solution, and doesn't address the
 core issues in the electricity sector. The fundamental problem is the perverse
 structural incentives that give rise to underinvestment in generation across the
 board. The gentailers could undoubtedly do better, but they're reasonably competitive
 with each other at both the retail and generation ends of the market.

 Do you support the current Government's commitment to build a LNG import terminal?

 No. This locks us in to long-term reliance on imported LNG. In addition to the
 environmental impacts, this puts us at the mercy of potentially volatile international
 prices.

 What about deep core geothermal or fusion energy?

 These are great technologies and it's great they're being researched in New Zealand.
 We're fully in favour of continuing to support domestic research on these sorts of
 technologies as part of a well-supported science and innovation ecosystem. However,
 these are new technologies that haven't yet been applied to reliable grid-scale
 generation, so it wouldn't be responsible to consider them as part of a planned energy
 mix. However, initiatives like our capacity investment scheme allow for a range of
 generation technologies — so if there's a breakthrough, there's no reason we couldn't
 take advantage of it.

 How do you justify your claims of job creation, GDP growth and household savings?

 Modelling the impact of large-scale policies like these is necessarily difficult and
 uncertain. We have taken a conservative approach to the claims we make and based these
 on similar modelling by reputable bodies. Modelling can be found in the full policy
 document.

 More Policies

 Unity

 Clean Up Politics

 Citizens' Voice

 Future-fit Education 

 Healthy People 

 Honouring Te Tiriti

 Smart On Crime

 Innovation

 Breakthrough Economy

 Tax Reset

 Affordable Housing

 Inter-Generational Infrastructure

 Nature

 Healthy Oceans

 Climate Action

 Healthy Land

 Join
 Volunteer
 Donate

 Thanks for signing up.

 We'll keep you up to date with Opportunity news, events, and updates.

 Please check your e-mail for a link to activate your account.

 Explore more

 Become a member

 Abundant Energy

 Abundant Energy

 New Zealand was built on the courage to change. It's time to change again.

 Sign in to your account

 Sign in

 or click here to create an account