Breakthrough Economy - The Opportunity Party

 Support our September Fundraiser and help change New Zealand politics for good.

 INNOVATION

 Breakthrough Economy

 It’s time to stop the decline. Let’s innovate.

 Opportunity will fund science, stand up for fairness and back small businesses to take
 a generational leap forward.

 Growth is slowing and our wages are stagnating, because our economic system settings
 haven’t changed in decades. The era of extractive industries and untouchable big
 business needs to end.

 We need space for new: new ideas, new opportunities, new businesses. To build this new
 economy, let’s invest for breakthroughs in the old one.

 Opportunity will properly fund our scientists and innovators to build the industries
 of tomorrow. We'll empower the Commerce Commission to stand up to the supermarkets and
 other incumbents who keep new competitors out and prices high. And we’ll back today’s
 small businesses with the future-focused legal structures, admin support and the
 research boosts they need.

 Opportunity will save Kiwi families $12–$31 per week by increasing competition in the
 supermarkets, banks and other sectors.

 Three pillars for a breakthrough economy

 Pillar 1

 Build NZ’s innovation engine

 To get our innovation system settings right, Opportunity will: 

 Fund science properly. We’ll lift research & development spending to at least 2%
 of GDP, introduce new technology investment tax credits and double funding for
 proven accelerator programmes.

 Invest in innovative people. We’ll forgive student loan interest for returning
 Kiwis, turn our polytechs into regional innovation hubs and launch a cross-party
 population strategy.

 Pillar 2

 Stand up for consumers

 An unfair economy can’t innovate. When uncompetitive sectors, like the supermarkets,
 are costing the average family $30 every week, it’s time to stand up.

 Opportunity will give the Commerce Commission the legal power and funding it needs to
 fight for Kiwi consumers, including the power to break up duopolies and other
 uncompetitive markets via the High Court.

 Pillar 3

 Power up small business

 To support small businesses to drive the breakthrough economy, Opportunity will
 properly fund small business budgeting services, speed up access to the R&D tax
 credit and ensure ACC and the retail payment system are fair.

 We’ll also create a new legal structure — the Impact Company — to recognise and
 encourage investment in businesses that generate profit while doing social and
 environmental good.

 Close

 What will you do in the breakthrough economy?

 Meet the Kiwis of Tomorrow crew to find out.

 Artist Credit: Thanks to @Ugly Ink for the illustrations!

 “It’s time to unleash our ingenuity. Let’s build an innovation economy that keeps
 young Kiwis here.”

 Read our full policy paper

 Download the full Breakthrough Economy policy
 Download PDF 

 Read the Breakthrough Economy Op-Ed
 Read more 

 How much will this cost?

 A breakthrough economy needs an investment of $1.33 billion of additional annual
 operational funding. This does not include any projections for growth resulting from
 implementing the package. This figure includes:

 Breakthrough Economy additional annual operational funding by policy

 Policy
 Annual Cost

 Restore core science operational funding cut in recent budgets$125 million
 Tax credit for technology adoption$600 million
 Funding for early and mid career researchers$100 million
 Expanded funding to major contestable funds$175 million
 Restore Polytech Funding$80 million
 Polytech and PRO bulk funding for business support$20 million
 Double funding of incubators, accelerators and youth enterprise initiatives$26.5 million
 Student Loan Working Overseas Forgiveness$95 million
 Commerce Commission Budget Uplift$20 million
 Consumer Advocacy Fund$5 million
 Expanded FinCap capability to support small business owners$20 million
 Widened R&D tax credit$30 million
 Tax deductibility for impact company investments$34 million

 For full assumptions and more information on these figures, see the policy document.

 Frequently asked questions

 How will you pay for this Breakthrough Economy investment?

 If enacted in full, our Tax Reset plan projects $4 billion in additional annual
 revenue. Breakthrough Economy investments would be made using this funding.
 Alternatively, the Breakthrough Economy investment could also be made through new
 funding as part of a future budget - in collaboration with other political parties.
 This is realistic given that the entire Breakthrough Economy package cost could sit
 within one year’s annual operating allowance as set out in Budget 2026.

 How do you know this will deliver economic growth?

 Predicting growth can be a challenge, but we estimate the Breakthrough Economy policy
 package could deliver up to 2% additional annual GDP growth after 10 years of
 implementation. Comparative small economies (like Singapore and Estonia) have
 sustained similarly high growth rates over multiple decades.

 Expert advice from economists, Treasury and OECD supports high-impact, pro-growth
 reforms like these for New Zealand. Generally, their advice is to invest in the
 drivers of future growth and productivity — innovation, competition and people’s
 skills. For more information on how our Breakthrough Economy policy does this, see the
 policy document.

 To support broad economic growth, our Breakthrough Economy policy also sits alongside
 our Abundant Energy policy to bring energy prices
 down, our Tax Reset policy to
 redirect capital from housing into the productive economy and our Affordable Housing 
 policy to improve life and business in our urban spaces.

 Can we afford NOT to do this?

 New Zealand's productivity performance has deteriorated for decades. Real wages have
 stagnated. Our brightest talent leaves for better opportunities overseas. Our
 businesses struggle to compete internationally beyond commodity exports.

 We feel the cost of our stagnant productivity in the rising cost of living, and
 widening inequality. We feel it in the hollowing out of our public services, because
 taxation can’t keep up with the challenges of an ageing population or climate change.

 Many New Zealanders are starting to feel that we need to make big reforms to reverse
 this slow decline. They’re right.

 What about the environmental impacts of growth?

 The kinds of industries that Opportunity wants to see emerge in New Zealand: high tech
 manufacturing, research and technology, high-productivity agriculture and AI are by
 their nature a lot less environmentally impactful than many of the industries that
 currently dominate our economy. In many cases they offer the possibility of solutions
 to help address our climate or environmental impacts.

 Is this a dramatic shakeup of our competition law?

 Yes. We think the current state of competition in many business sectors warrants a
 shakeup, rather than continued tinkering like the current Commerce Act Amendment Bill
 before Parliament.

 New Zealand’s competition regime lacks the ability to break up monopolies, impose
 industry-wide conduct obligations or address collusion. This has led directly to our
 near-unique market concentration and super-profits. Our proposal is modelled on
 provisions recently introduced in the EU and UK; both regarded as highly effective
 competition regimes.

 Why not break up the banks and supermarkets?

 Opportunity is open to the concept of structural separation of industries like
 banking, supermarkets and electricity generation. However structural separation is a
 blunt instrument that always imposes significant costs and market disruption. We think
 it should be done on the basis of expert analysis, and supervised by the courts. In
 some cases structural separation might be imposed, but more importantly, the threat of
 the Commerce Commission using it will improve market behaviour across the board.

 Giving the Commerce Commission the power to fight the monopolies in the High Court
 means they can also go after the many other highly concentrated sectors that don’t
 receive much political or media attention, but do impose significant costs on New
 Zealand consumers.

 More Policies

 Unity

 Clean Up Politics

 Citizens' Voice

 Future-fit Education 

 Healthy People 

 Honouring Te Tiriti

 Smart On Crime

 Innovation

 Abundant Energy

 Tax Reset

 Affordable Housing

 Inter-Generational Infrastructure

 Nature

 Healthy Oceans

 Climate Action

 Healthy Land

 Jade, 25

 Atmospheric Scientist

 Jade still can’t believe that she works from a weather balloon. Most days she’s in the
 office of the world-leading, Whangārei-based weather research agency she works for.
 But nothing beats seeing weather systems form from up here.

 She’s proud of her work. Everyday her team gets a little better at predicting storms
 before they hit communities, something insurance companies around the world are very
 interested in.

 On days like this, she’s glad she turned down that role in London. Having her student
 loan interest cancelled on her return was nice. But mostly, she’s just stoked to be a
 Kiwi scientist working for a successful, global business right here in Aotearoa - and
 a Northland sunrise always beats a grey London day!

 Leo, 35

 Future Food Innovator

 Leo grows forests indoors. At least, that’s what his kids call them.

 Inside a repurposed food manufacturing plant, towering columns of fungi stretch
 towards the ceiling as he helps create the next generation of sustainable food, fibre
 and medicinal products.

 The fermentation techniques he developed during his uni days are being put to good use
 in one of New Zealand’s fastest-growing export industries. Thanks to his upgraded
 local polytechnic hub, he gained support to commercialise and spent time alongside his
 South Korean clients to make his product line investment-ready.

 Leo is especially proud that the old factory he works from is busy again. The old
 Wattie’s building could have sat empty, but now supports 28 local jobs with more on
 the way.

 Wiremu, 35

 Seaweed Farmer

 Most of Wiremu’s mornings start in the water. That’s life when you manage a large
 seaweed farm. His rows of kelp drift beneath the surface and will become food,
 packaging material, fertiliser and bioplastics after harvest-time.

 When he was growing up, the industry barely existed. Today, seaweed farming employs
 coastal communities throughout Aotearoa - building wealth for locals while restoring
 the ocean.

 His koro was always in the water too. In his stories, the ocean was always teeming
 with life and coastal towns were the place to be. When Wiremu sees healthy, recovering
 fish populations and young people choosing to make a life here - he thinks about the
 stories he’ll tell his mokopuna too.

 Maia, 40

 Community Energy Engineer

 Maia used to work in oil and gas.

 Today she manages a neighbourhood energy hub that combines solar generation, battery
 storage, food production and waste-to-energy into a single local network.

 Retraining in renewable energy as a grid engineer felt like a gamble at the time. But
 thanks to her citizens’ income, she was confident to take the leap, working part-time
 to supplement her study. It was worth it. The hub she manages helps power homes, lower
 costs and strengthen the resilience of her hometown.

 Maia sees the world differently. She looks at compost piles, wind turbines and
 community gardens and sees the same thing. Energy in motion. What matters to her isn’t
 the tech, but how it connects people together to create things no-one can do alone.

 Sophie, 50

 Living Systems Designer

 Sophie must have walked this stretch of river a hundred times.

 So she notices things most people miss. A change in birdsong here. A slight shift in
 water clarity there.

 These little observations help bring her AI-powered ‘avatars for nature’ to life when
 she meets with her local council, iwi, farmer or community teams. Guided by a safe AI
 policy framework, her digital avatars identify the best value-for-money investments in
 nature - suggesting tree species, fertiliser applications, predator-trapping patterns,
 livestock rotations and more in real-time.

 Thanks to New Zealand’s reputation for ethical AI, her work is trusted around the
 world and her small business is flowing nicely.

 Kiri, 30

 Immersive Storyteller

 Kiri brings stories to life.

 Her Wellington studio fuses storytelling, technology and creativity to create
 experiences that transport audiences into worlds inspired by New Zealand.

 What started as an experiment during drama school has grown into a thriving creative
 business employing artists, developers, and designers and selling to global audiences.
 Her latest project is a Matariki VR experience that connects seven people around the
 world online in real-time, as the seven-star cluster moves across their skies.

 She’s been offered opportunities abroad but has always chosen to stay. The stories she
 wants to tell are here.

 Aroha, 35

 Conservation Tourism Guide

 Aroha can tell when her tourist guests ‘get it’.

 It comes after a few hours in the forest, after they’ve been getting muddy doing
 conservation work in-line with mātauranga Māori (Māori knowledge and wisdom). They
 realise that they aren’t there to just watch this forest being restored - but to learn
 some practical skills too.

 Drawing on knowledge passed down through her whānau, she teaches manuhiri (guests)
 about native plants, ecosystems and the unique stories of the landscape around them.

 People travel from all over the world to join her tours. They are not looking for
 another attraction, but for something real. Something that can only happen in this
 place.

 Kev, 35

 Farmer

 Kev farms a bit of everything.

 His cattle graze alongside vineyards. High-value medicinal plants grow where he can
 get the ute to them. Native bush grows where he can’t.

 The herd is still Kev’s pride and joy. But he’s coming round to the biodiversity
 credits, renewable energy and on-farm education programmes too. Consistent extra
 income matters in the farming game.

 This year he’s got a big wetland and forest project on the go in partnership with a
 group from town. It was always going to happen, but getting a tax cut on his land
 value tax helped too.

 Kev’s farm has changed a bit from Dad’s time. No doubt about it. Now that land prices
 have softened a bit, a new generation of farmers are out there creating everything
 from flax-based fashion lines to wool-polymer plastic and agri-tourism experiences. He
 often wonders what the school-kids who visit his farm as part of their curriculum will
 grow next.

 Close

 ×

 Previous

 Next

 Join
 Volunteer
 Donate

 Thanks for signing up.

 We'll keep you up to date with Opportunity news, events, and updates.

 Please check your e-mail for a link to activate your account.

 Explore more

 Become a member

 Breakthrough Economy

 Breakthrough Economy

 New Zealand was built on the courage to change. It's time to change again.

 Sign in to your account

 Sign in

 or click here to create an account