Date                July 2026

Policy              Breakthrough Economy

Document Type       Policy Overview




Breakthrough Economy
New Zealand’s economy is stuck in low gear. But we have the
talent, resources, and opportunity to shift up.

Our economy pays New Zealanders’ wages, funds our retirements and generates
tax revenue for essential public services. There is a reason our young people are
leaving for jobs in Australia: persistently higher economic growth across the ditch has
compounded into a 35% gap in per capita GDP.

But there are good and bad ways to grow the economy. Mining the conservation
estate and trawling our ocean-floors are short term solutions, and the economic,
social and environmental bills are coming due.

New Zealand has the potential to take another path. Modern, high-skill jobs in sectors
like research, software and high-tech manufacturing generate more economic value,
overcome our distance from major markets and offer better wages and conditions for
New Zealand workers. They also have far less of an impact on our environment, and in
many cases can contribute to solutions to improve it.



1.       Build New Zealand’s Innovation Engine
Just like starting a business, building the future economy New Zealanders deserve
will require us to invest: in the science, innovation and skills that breakthrough
companies need to thrive.

New Zealand spends only 1.5% of GDP on public and private research and
development—about the same as Poland and Turkey. The OECD average is 2.7% and
high-tech frontier nations spend upwards of 3%.

This leaves our businesses and overall economy less productive and means we
struggle to turn ideas into commercial products, productivity gains and high‑wage
jobs. Our export base remains stubbornly weighted towards volume‑driven physical
goods and dependent on fluctuating international prices for those goods. We need to
get serious about becoming a high-tech innovation-driven economy.

We are lucky to have a well-educated workforce that we already invest heavily in, but
many graduates head offshore to higher‑paying labour markets, often carrying large
student debt that makes it harder for them to return. There are also overseas skills we
need to harness.




Opportunity Party   Economy                                                               Page 1
1.1   Boost core science and technology transfer funding
At Opportunity we want a long term strategy to boost the level of R&D in New Zealand.
We will re-commit to the previous target of 2% of GDP (with at least 0.6% made up of
public science) within the next ten years. But we will also set a longer-term objective
of 3% of GDP by 2050 to match the high-tech frontier economies we want to emulate.

The Save Science Coalition estimates recent cuts to core science have totalled at
least $90 million in annual operational funding and have resulted in the loss of 550
science sector jobs. The Fellows of the Royal Society have identified $300 million in
total funding cuts. While enhanced focus on advanced technology is laudable, this
should not come at the expense of other research sectors, To get our core science
sector back on track we will:

•   Restore funding cut as part of science sector reorganisation in 2024
•   Further expand total science funding to meet inflation-adjusted 2018 levels, by
    boosting the major contestable funds and creating a new early and mid-career
    research support fund
• Ensure that future contestable research funds include the humanities and social
    sciences
    .
1.2 Tax credits for technology adoption
Our current R&D tax credits deliver good returns, but stop short of incentivising
companies to make the big investments needed to roll out cutting-edge technology
and don’t incentivise stronger cooperation between private and public researchers.
To bridge this gap we will introduce a new tax credit scheme.

It will allow claiming back as a tax credit up to 25% of the cost of rolling out high-tech
solutions such as AI and digital platforms, new plant and machinery and networked or
autonomous equipment.




Opportunity Party   Economy                                                                  Page 2
1.3 Make polytechnics an engine for technology-driven growth
Polytechnics can be regional anchors for practical, job-focused training, as well as
working directly with businesses to solve technical problems, access new export
markets and disseminate scientific expertise. To unlock the potential of polytechs to
level-up our regional businesses we will:

•     Restore the entirety of the baseline funding for Polytechs cut by the current
      Government and direct this funding towards training focused on core business
      skills such as market development, accessing export markets, managing
      cashflow and accessing finance
•     Bulk-fund polytechnics and public research organisations—up to $10,000 per
      business enquiry - to work with real-world business problems
•     Empower polytechs with a mandate to lead regional productivity growth,
      including by acting as hubs for sector-level initiatives

1.4   Double funding to incubator, accelerator, and deep tech programmes as
      well as young enterprise
Opportunity will double total Government funding to the start-up ecosystem,
including existing and new incubator and accelerator arrangements and the young
enterprise programme.

It appears that these programmes have been successful in crowding in private
investment and increasing the survival of start-ups and helping them grow, but the
monitoring and evaluation has been weak. We will closely evaluate the impact of
these programmes, and undertake a systematic review to prepare the ground for
possible further expansion.

1.5 Create a world-class environment for safe AI adoption
By robustly regulating AI and supporting widespread business adoption, we can seize
the productivity opportunity it affords. Our dedicated AI policy will provide more detail.

1.6 Forgive Loan Interest to Bring Kiwi Talent Home
We want to encourage young Kiwis to go offshore, get experience and build
connections. But we also want to bring all that back home and use it to drive the New
Zealand economy.

We will roll back student loan interest on up to 3 years spent overseas, for both
those newly graduating at present and those currently overseas. The roll back will
be applied at the end of loan repayment, and conditional on being resident in New
Zealand when the loan is repaid.

1.7 Agree a population policy for stable long-term immigration
Immigration can bring expertise, energy and capital to the New Zealand economy.
We need to attract the best and brightest globally to come and help us build a
breakthrough economy.

But immigration also needs to be accounted for in our investment in infrastructure,
planning and social programmes. It hasn’t in recent decades.




Opportunity Party   Economy                                                                  Page 3
The solution is a long term population strategy. This will set out the population
outcomes we want in the long-term, with average net migration outcomes to match.
Businesses, unions, NGOs and ordinary New Zealanders should have a say in what the
future of our population looks like, but at Opportunity we think moderate sustained
positive migration is the way to go.



2. Stand up for consumers
New Zealand’s economy is increasingly shaped by sectors where a handful of large
companies dominate. In these concentrated markets, big incumbents enjoy scale,
political access, regulatory influence and weak competition law, which makes it hard
for new entrants to gain a foothold. Market concentration in banking, supermarkets
and building materials cost the average household $30 every single week. It also
suppresses productivity growth by reducing competitive pressure to innovate and
improve efficiency across our economy.

2.1 Strengthen Competition Law and Enforcement
New Zealand has one of the weakest competition regimes in the world. This has
enabled concentration and excessive profits in many critical business sectors such
as banking, supermarkets, insurance, building supplies, aviation and utilities. This
doesn’t just result in higher prices for consumers; it acts as a drag on the overall
economy. Smaller dynamic firms cannot get a foothold, or are themselves bled dry by
excessive costs.

To bring market competition back to the New Zealand economy, Opportunity will
strengthen the Commerce Commission’s powers and independence by enabling it to:

•    Break up dominant companies where competition has clearly failed. The
     Commerce Commission will be able to ask the High Court to order the sale of
     assets, separate business operations, or require access to key infrastructure
     when market power has become too concentrated and other remedies have
     failed.




Opportunity Party   Economy                                                            Page 4
•    Use an expanded toolbox to fix competition problems in industry-appropriate
     ways, including industry-wide remedies following a market study or where
     there is tacit collusion and binding commitments as part of market dominance
     investigations.
•    Proactively investigate industries where competition is weak. The Commerce
     Commission will have greater freedom to launch investigations and market
     studies where there are signs that consumers and smaller businesses are being
     disadvantaged.

In addition, Opportunity will create a Consumer Advocacy Fund - a dedicated fund to
support independent consumer representation in major market reviews, regulatory
processes and competition investigations. This would help ensure consumers are
represented as effectively as large corporate interests.

Strong competition is one of the most effective ways to reduce prices, increase
innovation, lift productivity and improve living standards. These reforms would give
New Zealand a competition regime comparable to those found in many of the world’s
most productive small economies such as Denmark, Finland and Ireland.



3. Power up small business
Our economy is built on small businesses, and they have the potential to drive the
breakthrough economy. But they need support to address key skill and capability gaps.

Our current corporate form rules also mean that companies are driven to prioritise
profit above all else, while non-profit organisations and charities lack the business
models and structures to access finance for growth.

3.1 Get serious about supporting SMEs
Most SME operators—particularly sole traders and micro enterprises—are under-
capitalised, time-constrained and operationally focused.

To support SMEs more effectively, we will:

•    Fund FinCap and the Building Financial Capability sector to provide simple
     financial and accounting advice to small businesses. Many small businesses are
     financially intertwined with their owner-operators, and household budgeting
     needs can have business issues underlying them. Building capability among
     budgeting services to meet this need is a practical way to improve the business
     capabilities of small businesses and the New Zealanders who put their hearts and
     souls into them.
•    Review the ACC levy system with a view to introducing risk-weighted levies for
     those engaged in multiple different work activities.
•    Reverse the Retail Payment System (Ban on Merchant Surcharges) Amendment
     Bill if passed, and review competition within our payment infrastructure generally.
•    Make the R&D tax credit more accessible by introducing processing time
     requirements and a special track with simplified compliance requirements
     for spending below $250,000 and improving outreach and support to smaller




Opportunity Party   Economy                                                                Page 5
     businesses, especially in high value manufacturing. Develop innovation access
     programmes to enable smaller companies to participate in R&D as part of
     consortia and alongside CRIs, universities and polytechs.

3.2 Structure for Purpose
There is a gap in New Zealand for a legal entity structure that both drives the
economic growth of a traditional for-profit company and delivers the social benefits
of a charitable organisation.

We will amend the Companies Act to establish a new legal structure: the Impact
Company. Similar structures already exist overseas including in the UK, Canada,
United States, and Italy.

To qualify as an Impact Company, a business will need to state an explicit social and/
or environmental purpose in its constitution and publish annual Impact Reports that
account for social and environmental outcomes.

To encourage growth in new impact sectors, we will also enable companies or
individuals that invest in Impact Companies to deduct the investment as they would a
donation to charity, up to a maximum of $100,000 annually.



4. Frequently Asked Questions
How much will this cost?
The total estimated cost to the Crown of this policy is $1.33 billion of additional annual
operational funding. This is made up of the following components:


 Policy Element                        Annual Cost      Assumptions

 Restore core science operational      $125 million     Aggregate figures from the Save Science Coalition and
 funding cut in recent budgets                          public reporting suggest total cuts (including the non-
                                                        replacement of the National Science Challenges) of
                                                        around $125 million per annum.

 Tax credit for technology             $600 million     Uptake is difficult to predict. This cost estimate is roughly
 adoption                                               the current total annual cost of the current R&D tax
                                                        incentive. We expect some substitution effect between
                                                        the two programmes.

 Funding for early and mid career      $100 million     This figure is a rough estimate for a credible initial
 researchers                                            programme.

 Expanded funding to major             $175 million     Inflation adjusting 2018/2019 figures for Vote Science
 contestable funds                                      gives a total of $1.574 billion, around $400 million
                                                        more than current funding levels. Accounting for the
                                                        restoration of explicit cuts and additional targeted
                                                        spending on early and mid career researchers this still
                                                        leaves a shortfall of approximately $175 million.

 Restore Polytech Funding              $80 million      Public reporting indicated that Te Pukenga’s funding for
                                                        2025 had been reduced by $80 million, resulting in large
                                                        scale layoffs.



Opportunity Party   Economy                                                                                      Page 6
 Policy Element                      Annual Cost     Assumptions

 Polytech and PRO bulk funding for   $20 million     Uptake is difficult to predict. This figure assumes 2,000
 business support                                    enquiries across Polytechs and PROs at the full $10,000
                                                     value the programme enables.

 Double funding of incubators,       $26.5 million   Annual costs are hard to estimate as expenditure is a
 accelerators and youth enterprise                   mixture of repayable grants and standard operational
 initiatives                                         funding. We have assumed a doubling of the entire
                                                     $20 - 25 million grants programme formerly operated by
                                                     Callaghan Innovation.
                                                     Doubling current Ministry of Youth Development
                                                     enterprise programmes represents a further $1.5 million.

 Student Loan Working Overseas       $95 million     Total overseas loan balances of approximately $4.3 billion
 Forgiveness                                         imply headline interest accrual of $170–$215 million
                                                     annually. Much of this is paper accrual against loans
                                                     in default, but borrower behaviour could change with
                                                     a forgiveness programme. We have conservatively
                                                     assumed half of the total interest accrual as annual
                                                     programme cost.

 Commerce Commission Budget          $20 million     Current total budget (including levy revenue) is
 Uplift                                              approximately $90 million - reasonably generous by
                                                     international standards. Additional funding is an arbitrary
                                                     figure of around 20% of current funding to account for
                                                     additional enforcement activity.

 Consumer Advocacy Fund              $5 million      This figure is roughly based on comparisons to the
                                                     now-disestablished Consumer Advocacy Council
                                                     for electricity, the MBIE appropriation for Consumer
                                                     Information and overseas comparators.

 Expanded FinCap capability to       $20 million     The Ministry of Social Development provides $19.5
 support small business owners                       million of sustainable funding for 181.5 FTE financial
                                                     mentoring roles. Doubling this funding would enable a
                                                     similar number of staff to enable nationwide coverage
                                                     for business mentoring services, although these
                                                     would realistically be integrated with existing financial
                                                     mentoring functions.

 Widened R&D tax credit              $30 million     Additional uptake is hard to predict but is likely to be
                                                     small as changes target improving access for smaller
                                                     businesses. Current expenditure on R&D tax credits
                                                     is approximately $600 million (24/25 Supplementary
                                                     Estimates). Additional $30 million represents an arbitrary
                                                     5% expansion.

 Tax deductibility for impact        $34 million     Uptake is difficult to predict. This figure assumes
 company investments                                 1,000 investors at the maximum allowable deduction
                                                     of $100,000 (for a total of $100 million of annual
                                                     investment) and with an average marginal tax rate of
                                                     34%.




Opportunity Party   Economy                                                                                 Page 7
Elements not included in the above table involve legislative or policy changes that
are likely to impose very limited operating costs that could be absorbed within
departmental baselines.

How can you claim to deliver additional annual GDP growth?
Predicting the growth impacts of policies is not straightforward. We estimate our
mix of policies could deliver up to 2% additional GDP growth on average over the long
term. Comparator small economies such as Singapore and Estonia have sustained
similarly high growth rates over multiple decades.

Productivity Unleashed and many of our other policies are in line with expert advice
from the likes of Treasury and the OECD on high impact pro-growth reforms for New
Zealand.

Our Abundant Energy policy will make energy prices for businesses both lower and
more stable, unlocking opportunities for a wide range of energy intensive businesses
such as data centres and manufacturing. Our Tax Reset policy will redirect significant
capital from unproductive housing investment and significantly increase our saving
rate over time. It will also work together with our Affordable Housing policy in the long
term to improve the functioning of our urban spaces and the businesses that operate
and grow within them.

Productivity Unleashed invests substantially in three areas that are repeatedly
cited by the OECD as drivers of New Zealand’s poor productivity and GDP growth
performance: innovation, competition and skills. Some indication of the impacts that
could be realised include the following:

•    Government science spending is well-established to “crowd in” private spending
     on R&D - enhancing its impact. Estimates of the total economic effect of
     government science spending tend to come from larger OECD economies
     with deeper capital pools and more R&D intensive industries compared to New
     Zealand, but can range as high as a 3 - 4x multiplier.
•    The impacts of better competition law and enforcement, even in jurisdictions like
     New Zealand with relatively developed existing frameworks, is well established.
     The UK’s Competition and Markets Authority summarises a range of this
     evidence.
•    MBIE analysis has looked at the economic impact of measures such as R&D and
     commercialisation spending. It found the impact of the former Growth Grants
     (similar to our proposed polytech funding arrangements) delivered an economic
     multiplier of 1.22-3.65.
•    A widely cited estimate for Denmark suggested a peak contribution to total factor
     productivity growth from generative AI of up to 1.5%

What has the current government’s record on innovation been like?
The current government has moved in the wrong direction by cutting core Crown
science and innovation funding from a system already under strain. Budget 2024
removed hundreds of millions from the Science, Innovation and Technology portfolio.
It allowed inflation to erode baselines, wound up the National Science Challenges
programme, and cancelled future rounds of several key funds. Experts estimate this




Opportunity Party   Economy                                                                 Page 8
has contributed to hundreds of job losses across universities and Crown Research
Institutes. These cuts weaken the pipeline from discovery science to commercial
innovation, reduce New Zealand’s capacity to respond to long‑term challenges like
climate change and biosecurity threats, and send the wrong signal to businesses the
very moment we need them to increase their own R&D investment.

Isn’t this a dramatic shakeup of our competition law?
Yes. We think the current state of competition in many business sectors warrants a
shakeup, rather than continued tinkering like the current Commerce Act Amendment
Bill before Parliament.

New Zealand’s competition regime is largely modelled on Australia’s and together we
are near-unique among developed nations in lacking robust remedies like the ability
to break up monopolies, impose industry-wide conduct obligations or address tacit
collusion. This has led directly to our near-unique market concentration and super-
profits.

Our proposal is modeled on provisions recently introduced in the EU and UK; both
regarded as highly effective competition regimes.

Why not break up the banks and supermarkets?
Opportunity is open to the concept of structural separation of industries like banking,
supermarkets and electricity generation. However structural separation is a blunt
instrument that always imposes significant costs and market disruption. We think it
should be done on the basis of expert analysis, and supervised by the Courts. In some
cases structural separation might be imposed, but more importantly, the threat of the
Commerce Commission using it will improve market behaviour across the board.

Giving the Commerce Commission the power to fight the monopolies in the High
Court means they can also go after the many other highly concentrated sectors that
don’t receive much political or media attention, but do impose significant costs on
New Zealand consumers.




Opportunity Party   Economy                                                               Page 9
