Date                August 2026

Policy              Clean Up Politics

Document Type       Policy Overview




Clean Up Politics
Democracy means rule by the people. Clean Up Politics is
Opportunity’s plan to make sure the people of New Zealand
rule this country. Opportunity will hard-wire honesty,
transparency, and genuine public participation into our
democracy, so that corruption and the abuse of power cannot
take hold.

New Zealand has long prided itself on low corruption and high trust. But we can’t
assume that a historically clean political culture will always protect us. A recent
Serious Fraud Office assessment concluded that the risk of corruption is increasing,
incidents are under-reported and government agencies are insufficiently prepared to
prevent and respond to corrupt practices. New Zealand needs modern, world-leading
rules that keep pace with growing private and foreign influence in politics, expanding
political lobbying, and increasingly centralised executive power.

At present, New Zealand has no overall caps on political donations, and reporting
thresholds permit donors to pay significant sums to parties with limited transparency.
Lobbyists enjoy easy access to politicians. They have no register, no enforceable
code of conduct, and no obligation to disclose whom they meet or act for. New
Zealand has no central body responsible for addressing corruption. Transparency
International and local experts have repeatedly warned that these gaps create risks
and public perceptions of policy being ‘for sale’.

Opportunity will work across Parliament to lock in a bold, long-term package of
reforms built on three pillars.




Opportunity Party   Democracy                                                            Page 1
1.     Regulate lobbying
Recent controversies have shown how difficult it can be for the public to see who
influences important government decisions, what interests they represent, and what
contact they have had with decision-makers. Opportunity will introduce a Political
Influence and Lobbying Bill that creates:

•    A one-year cooling-off period closing the revolving door between Ministers,
     senior staff and officials, and lobbying roles.
•    A mandatory, public, searchable lobbying register, with quarterly disclosure of
     who lobbied which office-holders, on what issues, for which clients.
•    A statutory code of conduct for lobbyists, with sanctions from public censure to
     deregistration and fines. The code will include:
     • A prohibition on contingent‑fee arrangements for securing specific policy
         outcomes or contracts;
     • Requirements to avoid conflicts of interest among clients and declare
         relevant financial interests;
     • Transparency rules for communicating which clients they are working on
         behalf of and what their objectives are;
     • Requiring that all lobbying communications with Ministers concerning
         official business be conducted through, copied to, or recorded in official
         parliamentary systems so that they are retained and subject to the OIA;
     • Confidentiality rules for dealing with client and government information.
•    Foreign lobbying safeguards, with disclosure of foreign state or foreign-
     controlled clients and heightened scrutiny of lobbying on critical infrastructure,
     national security, media ownership, and strategic resources.



2. Reform political donations
New Zealanders believe money buys access and influence in politics. A 2020 Victoria
University of Wellington survey found 34% of the public believed corruption was
widespread throughout Government, and 71% had ‘not much’ or ‘little to no’ trust in
how political parties are funded. Opportunity will sever the link between donations
and influence, and make politics a competition of ideas, not fundraising machines.

•    A $30,000 cap per donor per party per electoral cycle. The Independent Electoral
     Review proposed an electoral donations cap at this level. Loan-as-donation
     structures and pass-through arrangements will be banned.
•    Only registered voters may donate. Opportunity will eliminate donations from
     companies, trusts and other entities, and ban donations from anyone who is not
     registered to vote in New Zealand.
•    Lower disclosure limits. Opportunity will lower the public disclosure threshold to
     $1,000 and require parties to publish audited annual statements.
•    Spending limits across the full cycle. Party and candidate advertising spending
     limits will apply across the full three-year electoral cycle, not just the final three
     months, with the Electoral Commission publishing quarterly spending summaries.




Opportunity Party   Democracy                                                                 Page 2
3. An integrity system that works
Good rules mean little without institutions that enforce them. Opportunity will
establish a genuinely independent anti-corruption body with investigative,
prevention, and education functions, integrating and co-ordinating existing anti-
corruption responsibilities. It will cover the full range of public officials, including
Ministers, MPs, parliamentary staff, the public service, Crown entities, SOEs, local
government, and contractors performing public functions. Its responsibilities will
include:

•    Investigating - including by compelling evidence and exercising search and
     surveillance powers under judicial warrant - and exposing corruption. This will
     include publicising findings as well as referring matters for prosecution to other
     bodies such as the Serious Fraud Office or Police.
•    Enforcing new rules that prohibit authorised electoral advertisements containing
     statements of fact that are inaccurate and misleading to a material extent,
     backed by the requirement to publish corrections.
•    Monitoring and reporting on systemic risk of corruption overall within the public
     service.
•    Administering the lobbying rules described above.
•    Educating the public sector on integrity and corruption
•    Ensuring government entities have appropriate internal prevention and response
     measures in place.

Alongside the anti-corruption body, Opportunity will upgrade the day-to-day integrity
rules:

•    Official Information Act reform: narrower withholding grounds, strengthening
     the public interest balancing test, enforceable timeframes for actually providing
     documents and binding order-making powers for the Ombudsman.
•    Stronger pecuniary interest rules: lower disclosure thresholds, mandatory
     disclosure of beneficial interests in trusts, and real-time reporting of significant
     changes.
•    Better whistleblower protections, with broader coverage, safe channels to the
     anti-corruption body and other enforcement bodies, and stronger protection
     against retaliation.
•    A stronger Electoral Commission with the funding and powers to enforce the
     rules in real time.
•    An independent policy costing unit available to all registered parties, to reduce
     fiscal ‘spin wars’ and improve the quality of election debates.




Opportunity Party   Democracy                                                               Page 3
