Date                May 2026

Policy              Tax Reset

Document Type       Policy Overview




It’s time for a Tax Reset
New Zealand has a tax and welfare system stuck in the past
while too many families struggle to make ends meet. Working
families face a cost-of-living crisis, with many unable to afford
basic necessities despite being employed.

Our tax settings were designed for a different era. We rely almost entirely on taxing
work and spending while land, one of our most valuable assets, largely escapes
taxation. Meanwhile, our welfare system traps people in poverty with punitive rules
and effective marginal tax rates that can reach 90%.

At the same time, we are woefully underprepared for the financial implications of an
ageing population. Treasury projections show that, without reform, expenditure on
National Superannuation will rise from approximately 15% of government revenue
today to around 22% by 2065. This growing fiscal burden threatens our capacity to
fund health, education, infrastructure, and climate transition. We need a system that
ensures retirement security while building the productive capacity to deliver it.

At Opportunity we know New Zealand can do better.

•      We would fundamentally reset New Zealand’s tax system through three
       interconnected reforms:
•      a Citizen’s Income providing $19,400 annually to every adult, combined with a
       streamlined tax and benefit system
•      Additional support, including disability, child, housing and single parent supports
       paid automatically to households on the basis of simple criteria
•      a Land Value Tax of 1.75% on urban land and 0.5% on rural land,
•      a compulsory contributory superannuation system (KiwiSaver 2.0) with
       contributions totaling 12% of gross earnings (6% employer, 6% employee),
       phased in gradually over 6-7 years.

Together these create a package that puts more money in New Zealanders’ pockets,
while making housing more affordable and our economy more productive. This is
an investment in ending the cost-of-living crisis, making work more rewarding, and
preparing New Zealand for the economic shocks ahead.

Our reforms will:

•      Give every adult the basics to live well and contribute to society
•      Replace most main benefits and streamline the welfare system, cutting
       bureaucracy




Opportunity Party   Tax                                                                      Page 1
•    Significantly decrease poverty, especially among children
•    Make housing affordable and redirect investment toward productive uses
•    Simplify income tax with clear brackets that eliminate secondary tax rates and
     bracket creep
•    Build up a large pool of savings that can finance infrastructure, support
     productive investment, and ensure comfortable retirement for all New Zealanders

Opportunity’s Tax Reset will enable:

•    An effective tax cut for the vast majority of New Zealanders, with the largest
     benefits going to working households earning between $20,000 and $120,000
•    Lifting at least 50,000 families out of poverty, with almost all working families
     reaching living wage income levels
•    Downward pressure on house prices and better conditions for developers to build
     more housing stock for more New Zealanders.
•    Simplified welfare with savings of at least $1.7 billion in administration costs
•    Ending poverty traps by eliminating effective marginal tax rates of up to 90% that
     currently prevent beneficiaries from working part-time
•    Greater resilience, with every New Zealander having a financial foundation to
     weather job losses, climate disasters, and economic shocks
•    Recognition of unpaid work with parents, caregivers, and volunteers valued for
     their contributions to society
•    Long-term fiscal sustainability by transitioning from an unsustainable pay-as-
     you-go pension system to a contributory model that links retirement income to
     lifetime contributions
•    A domestic savings pool that will top $1 trillion within 20 years, increasing the
     availability of capital and lessening our reliance on offshore borrowing and
     strengthening our financial resilience




Opportunity Party   Tax                                                                   Page 2
The problems we’re solving
The cost-of-living crisis is crushing working families
When butter, cheese, fruit, and vegetables are increasingly out of reach for everyday
New Zealanders, something is fundamentally broken. Working families struggle to
afford rent, power bills, and groceries despite being employed. Their work is heavily
taxed while untaxed capital gains on housing enrich property owners at the expense
of renters and first-home buyers.

Welfare isn’t working—it traps people in poverty
The current benefit system punishes work through devastating effective marginal
tax rates. When someone on Jobseeker Support picks up a few hours at the local
café, they can lose up to 90 cents of every dollar they earn. This isn’t a pathway out of
poverty; it’s a trap that keeps people stuck on benefits.

The system subjects beneficiaries to intrusive monitoring that costs hundreds of
millions annually and is degrading to those who need support. This money could be
going directly to families in need. It is also needlessly complex, so that even experts
struggle to navigate it. This complexity enables fraud, increases compliance costs,
and leaves people in debt from accidental overpayments.

An outdated tax and welfare system is not fit for hard times
Our tax and welfare system was designed for a different economy. It cannot handle
the shocks ahead of us: AI-driven job losses, extreme weather events, and economic
uncertainty. We need a straightforward system that will support New Zealanders to
adapt to job-loss, and permit flexible work and training. These are the realities future
workers will need to adapt to in response to a changing and less stable world.

A broken housing system locks Kiwi families out of stability and security
A home should provide security and stability—the foundation for a productive life. Yet
our tax system has put home ownership out of reach for an entire generation. House
prices have risen dramatically since 2000, driven by speculation and untaxed capital
gains rather than the productive use of land. Our tax settings incentivise holding land
for capital appreciation rather than building dense housing or investing in businesses.
This creates an economy where money flows into property speculation instead of the
innovation and hiring that drive real prosperity.

Our retirement income is on an unsustainable trajectory
New Zealand’s current retirement income system is on an unsustainable path with
today’s benefits funded entirely from current tax revenue. As our population ages,
this model faces mounting pressure. Treasury projects that, without reform, National
Superannuation expenditure will rise from 15% of government revenue today to
approximately 22% by 2065.

Without reform, we face three unpalatable choices: raise taxes substantially on
working-age New Zealanders, cut superannuation benefits for retirees or reduce
other essential public services. None of these options is acceptable.




Opportunity Party   Tax                                                                     Page 3
At the same time, New Zealand’s low national savings rate limits our capacity to fund
productive investment domestically. We remain heavily reliant on offshore capital,
exposing us to external shocks and limiting our ability to finance infrastructure and
economic transformation on our own terms.



1.     Give every Kiwi the basics to live well and contribute
The Citizen’s Income is a tax-free universal payment that ensures every New
Zealander has the financial foundation to participate fully in society.

1.1    The Citizen’s Income
Every New Zealand Citizen and resident aged 18 and over receives an annual amount
equivalent to the Jobseeker benefit; currently $19,400 annually, paid fortnightly
into their bank account. No forms to fill in, no Work and Income appointments, no
relationship status checks—just a guaranteed payment that provides the basics.

The Citizen’s Income replaces many main benefits, including:
• Jobseeker Support
• Sole Parent Support
• Student Allowance
• Supported Living Allowance

1.2 Income Tax Realignment
To balance the Citizens’ Income, simplify the tax system, and maintain progressivity,
current income tax rates will be replaced with three straightforward income tax
brackets:
• 28% for income up to $50,000 p/a
• 34% for income between $50,001 and $200,000 p/a
• 39% for income at $200,001+ p/a

Combined with the Citizens’ Income, this represents a reduction in total income tax
at all income levels, with the largest reductions at lower income levels where it is most
needed.Those earning less than $60,000 per year will pay less income tax than the
Citizens’ Income they receive.




Opportunity Party   Tax                                                                     Page 4
1.3 A Simplified Benefit System
For most people, the Citizens’ Income will not be enough to live on. Many New
Zealanders need additional income to support themselves and their families, and
can not necessarily be expected to obtain it from employment. The current system
of benefits and tax credits is complex, punitive, and expensive to administer. We will
replace the bulk of it with the following universal supplementary supports:
• All parents will receive the following tax free Child Support Incomes
    • First year: First child $18,250 ; Each subsequent child $17,250
    • Second year: First child $13,750 ; Each subsequent child $12,750
    • Third year: First child $13,750 ; Each subsequent child $12,750
    • Years 4-18: First child $7,750 ; Each subsequent child $6,750
• These Child Support Incomes replace: Working for families payments (family
    tax credit and in work tax credit), Paid Parental Leave payments, and Best
    Start payments. They will be available for all parents, are not reliant on parents
    attending work, training, or study nor children attending a daycare service. This
    saves extensive bureaucratic costs and gives parents more freedom of choice.
    The 20 hours subsidy for children aged 3 and over to attend Early Childhood
    Education is unchanged.
• Sole parents will receive an additional allowance of $9,500 per annum
• A disability allowance of $6,000
• Superannuitant top-ups of $5,250 in total for a couple or $10,000 for a single
    person
• Housing Support Income payments based on regional housing costs but
    averaging $10,500 for families and $6,500 for couples and singles.

Each type of support will gradually reduce by 10 cents for every extra dollar earnt,
starting from household income between $50,000 and $75,000. This efficiently
ensures that the most support goes to those who need it the most.

In all cases, eligibility is based on straightforward criteria and does not require
complex administrative assessments, namely means testing or job search
requirements. Applications will be made online through My IRD or MyMSD and
automatically approved if criteria are met.



2. Make housing affordable through a Land Value Tax
The Land Value Tax fixes the broken settings that have driven house prices to
unconscionable levels. By taxing land, we redirect money from speculation to
productive uses while encouraging the dense housing supply New Zealand
desperately needs.

The LVT changes incentives:
• Land banking becomes expensive, encouraging sale to those who will use land
    productively
• Dense development pays off, as the tax is on land value, not improvements
• Speculation becomes less profitable, as annual holding costs increase
• Productive use is rewarded, as farms and businesses generate income to pay the
    tax.




Opportunity Party   Tax                                                                  Page 5
This represents a massive redirection of investment from unproductive land holdings
toward businesses, hiring, and innovation.

With an estimated total land value of approximately $1.7 trillion nationally, the LVT
generates approximately $24 billion annually. This is what enables the Citizens’
Income changes above.

2.1 A Land Value Tax of 1.75% on urban and 0.5% on rural land.
An annual tax on the unimproved value of all urban land set at 1.75%. Critically, this
does not include the value of buildings or other improvements.

We already know the land value of much of our land: it’s included in Council rating
valuations.

Rural land is more challenging to value, and the revenue of many rural businesses are
subject to changes in global prices and extreme weather events. A lower land value
tax rate of 0.5% is therefore appropriate.

2.2 Exemptions for public functions
A land value tax is designed to shift land-use towards more efficient uses such as
higher-density housing. However, there are some land uses that deliver public benefit
or that it would be otherwise inappropriate to impose a land value tax on.

Exemptions to the land value tax will apply for:
• Communally-owned Māori land
• Conservation land (public and private)
• Land owned by clubs, societies, and non-commercial religious organisations
• Local and central government land
• Treaty settlement land (subject to consultation with iwi), and
• Social housing.




Opportunity Party   Tax                                                                  Page 6
2.3 Deferrals protect older people and farmers
Similar to the land uses for exemption, there are some landowners for whom the LVT
risks imposing undue hardship.

Older people are typically on fixed incomes and may be unable to generate additional
income by working or access the capital stored in their houses. For superannuitants,
all LVT will be deferrable until the property is sold.

While farms generate income and can therefore pay the lower rural LVT, the farming
sector is for the most part exposed to global commodity prices and weather events
that can affect profitability. In both situations more limited LVT deferral will be available.



3. Saving for our future
New Zealand needs a retirement system that is fiscally sustainable,
intergenerationally fair, and economically productive.

We will transition from the current pay-as-you-go National Superannuation to a
compulsory contributory superannuation system—KiwiSaver 2.0—that builds a large
pool of national savings while ensuring every New Zealander can retire with dignity.

This addresses the unsustainable trajectory of superannuation costs while creating
a trillion-dollar pool of capital to finance our infrastructure and investment in
productive Kiwi firms.

3.1 Compulsory and universal Kiwisaver 2.0
KiwiSaver 2.0 will be fully compulsory for all eligible workers. Once fully implemented
(after 8 years) contributions will total 12% of gross earnings: 6% employer
contribution and 6% employee contribution. To minimise disruption to workers and
businesses, contribution rates will increase gradually; by 0.5 percentage points per
year for each of employer and employee contributions.

KiwiSaver 2.0 will be entirely separate from the existing voluntary KiwiSaver scheme,
which will remain in place as a supplementary savings vehicle for those who want to
use it. Existing Kiwisaver holders will be able to transition funds to the new account if
they wish.

Unlike current Kiwisaver balances, Kiwisaver 2.0 will not be able to be withdrawn for
hardship or first-home deposits. However, we will enable bank loans over balances to
support first home buyers to access lending.

3.3 Full tax exemption
Once fully phased in, the entire 12% contribution (6% employer + 6% employee) will
be exempt from income tax. This provides substantial tax relief whilst encouraging
long-term retirement savings. Tax on income earned within KiwiSaver 2.0 funds will be
progressively reduced, with all fund income becoming tax-exempt after twenty years.




Opportunity Party   Tax                                                                          Page 7
Tax Reset—Frequently Asked Questions

How will you pay for the Citizen’s Income?
The policy as a whole is fiscally positive. Based on 2024 numbers, the Land Value
Tax pays for the Citizen’s Income with around $4 billion extra annually in net Crown
revenue.


 Cost                                                                       $m           Revenue                  $m

 Net cost of CI                                                             13637        Land Value Tax           24323

 Headline CI Cost                                           69648                        Administration Savings   1742
                                                                                         (MSD, IRD)

 Less Income Tax Clawback                                   (23381)

 Less student loan and main benefit          (32630)
 replacement (Jobseeker, NZ Super, Supported
 Living, Sole Parent, Student Allowance)

 Net Supplementary Support cost                                             8279

 Additional benefits cost                                   15614

 Less additional benefits replaced                          (7335)

 Total cost                                                                 21916        Total revenue            25997

Previous versions of this table used incorrect data that did not materially alter the overall balance.
This was most recently amended on 7/08/2026.


Is the Citizen’s Income just giving people money to do nothing?
No. Fairness and efficiency sit at the heart of the Tax Reset. But we get it. At first
glance, the Citizen’s Income can feel confronting. We believe it’s the right policy for
New Zealand for three reasons:

•    The current benefit system is a mess. It traps people in poverty by penalising
     them with 70%+ effective tax rates when they take on part-time work. People
     spend hours filling in paper work at WINZ offices or wasting employers time in job
     interviews they don’t want to be at. Under a Citizen’s Income, work always pays
     and we won’t waste billions every year on bureaucracy.
•    The benefit system is straining. It will not cope with the unemployment
     challenges that economic shocks, extreme weather or AI disruption will throw
     at us. The solution is to look towards the universal income system that already
     works well in New Zealand - NZ Superannuation. NZ Super works because we
     value the security it offers to every older Kiwi and because the system prioritises
     efficiency over box ticking for every recipient.
•    At $19,400 per year, the Citizen’s Income is not enough to live on. The research
     shows that people don’t stop working when they get it - instead they get the
     basic security needed to retrain for better jobs, start businesses, take time to
     find the right job (rather than the first job) or care for children or family without
     going broke.




Opportunity Party   Tax                                                                                                  Page 8
What happens to NZ Superannuation?
No-one who relies on NZ Superannuation will receive less than they currently do
under the Tax Reset. Under the policy, NZ Superannuation will be replaced by the
Citizen’s Income, combined with a top-up figure that brings the total payment into line
with current NZ Super rates. In the longer term, as Kiwisaver balances grow under our
Kiwisaver 2.0 system, this top-up could be reduced more in line with income, so that
wealthier superannuitants pay more of their own way.

Will the Tax Reset result in savings across government departments?
Yes. A key benefit of taking a universal approach to spending (as opposed to targeted
approaches) is a reduction in administration and bureaucracy costs. We project
that the Tax Reset could generate at least $1.7 billion in administrative cost savings
across multiple departments, with the greatest efficiencies in the Ministry for Social
Development and the Inland Revenue Department. This table provides a topline
breakdown of the projected savings in administration costs.


 Organisation                            Current operating       Projected operating
                                         expenditure ($m)        saving ($m)

 Ministry of Social Development          1,631.0                 977.0

 Inland Revenue                          755.0                   255.0

 Ministry of Business, Innovation and    1,200.0                 150.0
 Employment

 Oranga Tamariki                         1,559.0                 151.5

 Ministry of Justice                     942.3                   213.8

 Total Administrative Savings            6,087.3                 1,747.3



What will happen to people with disabilities living on benefits?
No one on a current benefit will receive less income than they do currently - including
Kiwis with a disability. The Citizens Income will not replace disability supports
targeted at specific needs such as transport or assistive technology. Necessary top-
ups to the Citizens’ Income for those on higher benefits have been included in our
costing.

Day to day life on a disability benefit will improve under the Tax Reset - thanks to less
paperwork and the ability to take on the right kind of work (at the right hours) without
being penalised by losing benefits.

Be straight up. Who wins and who loses from the Tax Reset?
Renters and lower income workers will benefit the most from the Tax Reset. This
group will see a significant income tax cut (the largest in New Zealand history) and
benefit from more affordable housing.

Most homeowners will either get a smaller tax cut, stay the same or see a small tax
increase - depending on their income and property value.




Opportunity Party   Tax                                                                     Page 9
People on a benefit will not receive any additional income, but will benefit from a more
efficient system that removes the ‘poverty trap’, where taking on work incurs effective
tax rates of 70% or more.

Some ‘asset rich, cash poor’ Kiwis (like older New Zealanders and farmers) will be
incentivised to make different choices under the Tax Reset. For example, a retired
couple will reduce their tax bill by downsizing their home or shifting into renting
(freeing up that home for the next generation). Or a farmer may choose to plant
marginal farmland into native forests (for a tax cut), invest in more productive land-
uses or sell part of their farm to a young farmer. To ensure retirees and farmers are
supported through the decade-long Tax Reset transition, lower rates, deferrals and
exemptions are included in the policy.

People who own a large property portfolio or are landbanking will see lower profits and
be incentivised to invest their money in more productive sectors of the economy.

We recognise that some Kiwis will have to make different choices under the Tax
Reset. But we’re confident that this policy offers New Zealand the smoothest, most
controlled exit off our current pathway to fiscal crisis. That’s a road that leads to some
really painful choices - so let’s change our direction today.

Will the Land Value Tax bring house prices down?
Yes, That’s the point. We project that a 1.75% annual Land Value Tax on residential and
commercial land would cause a 10-15% reduction in property prices. Ideally this would
be spread over a number of years as the market factors in the tax - which we cover in
our Tax Reset transition plan. The LVT achieves this downward pressure by making it
less profitable to hold property for speculation - encouraging landowners to either
develop their land to cover the tax, or sell it to others.

We understand that this will be confronting for home-owners. People who have
bought a house expecting it to appreciate in value, followed the tax system
incentives. But when we factor in the $19,400 annually from the Citizen’s Income,
most homeowning households will be better off.

Under an LVT, collectively we’ll build an economy that avoids crazy boom cycles (like in
2020-2022) and ensures the next generation of Kiwis get the security and stability of
a home too.

Are these new ideas? Have they been tested before?
The Land Value Tax is an old idea and we use it today in the form of council rates.
It’s used at council and regional levels in places like Denmark, Taiwan and several
Australian states too.

In fact, NZ was a world leader in introducing a Land Value Tax and it has been a key
method of taxation in our history. With the property market strangling our productive
potential – it’s time to bring it back at the national level.

The Citizen’s Income (otherwise known as a Universal Basic Income) is a newer idea.
Countries like Finland and Ireland are expanding trials of the system after seeing how




Opportunity Party   Tax                                                                      Page 10
income security enables people to study, start businesses, care for family or step-up
in their community.

All that said, we understand this is a big change. But the problems the Tax Reset
is trying to solve - like housing unaffordability, the cost of living crisis and an
unsustainable retirement system - have been getting worse for decades. We think
New Zealand deserves a serious attempt at fixing the foundations of our society and
preparing properly for AI disruption, climate shocks and economic uncertainty ahead.

What does all this mean for the Government deficit?
In a fiscally tight situation like the one we find ourselves in, you really only have three
options - cut services, grow the economy or raise revenue. The Tax Reset is about
doing all three in the most efficient, productive way possible. The Tax Reset will:

•    Cut services by removing the bureaucracy of the current benefit system -
     repurposing 2,000 Ministry of Social Development employees where they can
     have more impact.
•    Grow the economy by delivering a tax cut to the 70% of Kiwis most likely to spend
     it, and unlocking capital for business lending instead of property investment.
•    Raise revenue through the Land Value Tax. This is a fully-funded package of
     reforms that generates an additional $4b annually that we can use to invest in our
     future and reduce the deficit.

Why pay people a Citizens’ Income and also raise tax rates to 28%, 34% and
39%?
This mechanism ensures that Kiwis on no (or very low) incomes can cover the
basics - without the need for complex, expensive and intrusive means-testing. This
process builds progressiveness into the system in a similar way to the New Zealand
Superannuation - where any extra income people make above their basic-payment
(like the Citizen’s Income or Superannation) is taxed in higher brackets.

Other countries (like Australia) get around this problem by using a tax free three
threshold - where the first $10,000 or so of income is not taxed. That’s a good start,
but the Citizen’s Income goes further. It solves the ‘poverty trap’ that stops people
taking on work while on a benefit, achieves significant system efficiencies and (when
partnered with the Land Value Tax) finally ends our economic reliance on high house
prices.

Does the Citizen’s Income give millionaires money?
By itself? Yes. But we have paired the Citizen’s Income with a Land Value Tax. Because
most wealthy Kiwis own larger property portfolios, the additional tax they pay usually
outweighs the $19,400 per year they receive as Citizen’s Income.

Is the Citizen’s Income only for New Zealand citizens?
The Citizen’s Income is for all New Zealand residents aged 18 and over who meet
standard residency requirements, similar to current benefit eligibility. Prisoners
generally do not receive the Citizen’s Income, based on existing benefit structures,
though payments may go to the caregivers of their children. Temporary or RSE
workers will also require extra considerations and provisions in the Tax Reset policy,
which we’ll work with impacted sectors to design.



Opportunity Party   Tax                                                                       Page 11
Can you implement the Tax Reset gradually?
That’s the plan! Change of this scale requires phased implementation. In our view the
most effective approach would be to gradually increase LVT rates and introduce the
Citizens’ Income to successive age cohorts, starting with young people. Check out
our Tax Reset transition plan for more details.

What about people who have worked hard and saved to buy a house?
We understand this concern deeply, and we want to be clear - the Tax Reset is not
designed to punish people who own a home. Most homeowners will be better off once
their Citizens’ Income is factored in.

Many homeowners have seen their property values rise substantially over the years,
often through no action of their own. That’s not a criticism of anyone who bought a
house and got lucky with timing. But it does point to something being wrong with the
underlying system, and that’s what we’re trying to fix. A New Zealand where your house
makes more money than you do - is not one that’s working for the next generation.
The LVT corrects this imbalance. You still own your house. You still benefit from
capital gains, though they’ll be lower as land values adjust. Except now you live in a
country where housing is affordable for your children and grandchildren, businesses
can grow because capital isn’t locked up in property and everyone has basic security
through the Citizen’s Income.

We think that’s a fair deal.

What does the Land Value Tax mean for ‘asset-rich, cash-poor’ Kiwis like
retirees or farmers?
To ensure that every Kiwi is supported through the Tax Reset transition - lower rates,
exemptions and deferments apply. Retirees will be able to defer their Land Value Tax
- making it payable by their estate. Farmers will benefit from a 0.5% Land Value Tax,
be able to exempt privately owned conservation land and defer their tax payments in
tough weather or economic seasons.

What effect will the Citizen’s Income have on poverty?
Our conservative estimate suggests the Citizen’s Income will lift at least 50,000
families out of poverty, as measured by the BHC50 metric (50% of median household
income before housing costs). This is conservative, because it doesn’t account
for higher economic growth, lower health costs from less stress and hardship,
better educational outcomes for children in secure households or increased
entrepreneurship and risk-taking.

Could a Citizen’s Income reduce wages?
Based on trials in other countries, there is no evidence that wages are reduced.
In fact, wages for the lowest-paid workers may increase because they have more
bargaining power. With guaranteed income, workers don’t have to accept exploitative
jobs out of desperation. Employers will need to offer decent pay and conditions to
attract workers. To ensure the benefits of the Citizen’s Income aren’t captured by
employers, we would retain minimum wage protections.




Opportunity Party   Tax                                                                  Page 12
Could a Citizen’s Income be inflationary?
Maybe temporarily. It’s possible that there may be modest inflationary pressure from
increased purchasing power among low and middle-income households. But this will
be moderated by additional tax paid through the LVT, staged implementation giving
the economy time to adjust, Reserve Bank monetary policy levers as needed and
increased saving through Kiwisaver 2.0. The policy will be signaled well in advance,
giving the Reserve Bank time to assess whether any adjustments are needed.

Won’t the Land Value Tax just get passed on to renters?
The supply of land is fixed, and those who own houses don’t want to lose money with
them sitting empty. So there’s a limit to Landlord’s bargaining power with respect to
their tenants. International evidence suggests that the expected future tax would be
capitalized into land values - causing property prices and rents to reduce.

Longer term, the LVT encourages development of higher-density housing, increasing
supply and reducing rents for everyone. Our housing policy will also increase the
supply of low cost housing over time, providing more options to renters whose rents
might have increased.

Won’t landlords just increase rents if people get the Citizens’ Income?
This is a fair concern, and one we take seriously. History shows it can happen. When
student allowances were increased under the last Labour government, much of that
money ended up going to landlords through higher rents rather than to students
themselves.

The honest answer is that in a broken housing market, any income boost risks being
captured this way. This is exactly why our runaway housing market has been such a
driver of inequality over the past few decades, and why we’re not just introducing a
Citizens’ Income and hoping for the best.

The Land Value Tax is the piece that changes the underlying dynamic. By taxing land
rather than income or buildings, it becomes costly to sit on underdeveloped land or
run a large property portfolio. This pushes more housing into the market, and more
supply is the only thing that reliably brings rents down over time. A landlord can only
charge what the market will bear, and when there are more homes to choose from,
that ceiling drops.

The Citizens’ Income and the LVT are not separate ideas bolted together. They’re
designed as a system. One puts money in people’s pockets. The other works to make
sure the housing market cannot simply take it out again.

What about those Kiwis who bought a house in the 2020-2022 boom?
This group of Kiwi home-owners are under particular pressure. Falling house prices
have left many in negative equity (owing a mortgage larger than the value of their
home). This kind of price volatility is specifically what the Tax Reset is designed to fix.
Many of these Kiwis will benefit from higher incomes thanks to the Citizen’s Income,
which will give them more flexibility to decide to stay in the housing market or leave it.




Opportunity Party   Tax                                                                       Page 13
How do you actually implement a Land Value Tax?
Council rating systems already value both land and total property separately. These
valuations are sufficiently reliable for initial implementation. Over the longer term, we
would consolidate into a single national system potentially linked to the land transfer
system, ensuring accuracy and reducing compliance costs.

How will a Land Value Tax impact farming businesses?
To ensure that farmers are supported through tough seasons and the broader Tax
Reset transition, the Land Value Tax is reduced to 0.5% for rural land and deferrals
may apply.

It’s true that farming can be a very low-margin business. For many farmers, the
business model has become more about holding on for capital gains from land sales
- because delivering consistent strong returns from farming practices can be such a
challenge. That isn’t sustainable. Food and fibre is a critical part of NZ’s economy and
we need our farmers to be profitable. That’s why the Land Value Tax sits amongst a
broader policy package designed to step-change research, development and high-
value food & fibre production. It is one stick amongst many carrots and is a necessary
measure to reduce land prices so that young farmers can get into ownership and
start innovating. When the average age of a sheep and beef farmer is pushing 60 -
downward pressure on land prices is necessary for the sector’s future.

Is the Tax Reset politically realistic?
We acknowledge that the Tax Reset is a bold, transformative plan for New Zealand.
But our current tax system is clearly failing - young Kiwis are leaving, economic growth
is stagnating and our housing market is broken. We are standing to be a political
bridge to a better, more future-fit tax system. So we’ll work with our political partners
to enact the 10-year Tax Reset transition plan within the confines of MMP politics and
offer them the political cover to make hard choices about the future.

Won’t a reduction in house prices undermine the revenue you expect to gain
from the LVT?
Somewhat, yes. If land values fall as a result of the LVT, the tax base shrinks along
with them. We’ve modelled for this and our revenue projections already account for a
meaningful reduction in land values over time. It’s also worth noting that the LVT is set
at a rate that generates sufficient revenue even at lower land valuations than we see
today.

It’s also worth keeping in mind what a fall in land values actually means in practice.
It means housing becomes more affordable. We’re comfortable accepting some
reduction in the tax base if the tradeoff is that more New Zealanders can afford a home.

If the cost of NZ Superannuation is unaffordable, why not reduce entitlements
immediately?
Changes to superannuation need to be approached gradually so that people have
time to plan and build up their savings. Older people who have moved out of the
labour market are generally not able to use employment to compensate for a loss of
net income. The Retirement Commission recently recommended a ‘ten year roadmap’




Opportunity Party   Tax                                                                     Page 14
approach to reform of NZ Superannuation. Putting in place our Citizens’ Income,
Tax Reset, and Kiwisaver 2.0 policies would be a really useful start to the process of
superannuation reform; giving us more options in the medium to long term to make
savings without consigning older people to poverty.

Why not exempt rural land from the LVT altogether?
Rural land is overvalued too. Young farmers increasingly find it difficult or impossible
to get into the business and buy land for themselves. A succession crisis is looming
in the industry. A modest LVT will help to put some downward pressure on speculative
price increases for farms, ultimately making the industry more sustainable in the long
term.

Can local councils still charge rates?
Yes. The LVT is a national tax generating revenue for the Citizen’s Income and national
services. Council rates continue to fund local services. They’re separate systems
serving different purposes.

Why exempt Kiwisaver 2.0 contributions from tax?
The government will still tax the gains from Kiwisaver. It means that when someone
puts $100 into their kiwisaver it won’t be taxed down to around $70. They can then
earn investment returns on the full $100 and only be taxed on those gains.

The tax exemptions will be funded by the National Superannuation Fund. In the long
run, increased returns on a bigger pool of savings will more than cover that initial cost
to Government.

What was your process in designing the Tax Reset. Have independent
economists reviewed this?
The Tax Reset was designed by Opportunity’s team of practising and retired
economists. External economists have reviewed and provided feedback on the policy.

What about Temporary Residents and Workers. Increasing tax rates without a
Citizen’s Income will dramatically raise their tax bill.
There are small groups of workers who will require extra considerations and provisions
in the Tax Reset policy - including temporary or RSE workers. We’ll work with impacted
industries to ensure the Tax Reset takes these groups into consideration, while
balancing the pro-domestic hiring incentive that would eventuate if a higher tax
burden was placed on foreign workers.




         This policy is dedicated to the memory of Ethne Bellingham, an
         enthusiastic supporter since 2020.

         She actively encouraged and supported her partner Owen Shaw to work
         on this policy, despite facing a terminal illness herself. She is greatly
         missed by all who knew her in Opportunity.




Opportunity Party   Tax                                                                     Page 15
