Date                February 2026

Policy              Abundant Energy

Document Type       Policy Overview




Abundant Energy
New Zealand is an energy-rich country that behaves as
though we are energy-poor.


We have some of the best solar, wind, hydro, and geothermal resources in the world.
But we spend over $20 billion a year buying expensive fossil fuels to burn, much of this
money heading offshore. And we still live with volatile power prices, kids going to bed
cold and Kiwi businesses leaving their machinery idle or shutting up shop altogether.

At Opportunity we know we can do better.We can have abundant clean energy to
power warm comfortable homes and thriving businesses.

We will work across Parliament to secure a bold long-term plan to:

•      Triple our renewable electricity generation capacity to 30 Gigawatts by 2050
•      Reform the market to make sure generators and distributors are making the
       big investments needed to power our energy future and putting the needs of
       consumers first
•      Support Kiwis to electrify our homes, communities and businesses

This is an investment in lower household bills, more manufacturing, higher wages,
better health, and a safer climate.

Our reforms will:

•      Change how our electricity market works so it incentivises new renewable
       capacity and delivers lower prices for all.
•      Invest in smart distribution networks to get clean energy where it needs to go
•      Add 19 GW of new renewable generation capacity to the grid by 2050 to reach a
       30GW energy abundance target
•      Electrify our homes and transport to make New Zealand the world’s most energy
       efficient country

Our Energy Abundance policy will mean:

•      5,000 extra high-skilled jobs to build the infrastructure we need over the next 30
       years and 0.5% or more additional GDP growth
•      Direct annual savings of $500+ for the average household from cheaper
       electricity bills and further savings of $2,700+ from EVs, rooftop solar and
       appliance electrification
•      Business opportunities for sectors like primary processing, manufacturing and
       transport that lift annual GDP growth by 0.35% or more




Opportunity Party   Energy                                                                  Page 1
•    Warmer, drier homes for our poorest kids to grow up in - meaning better lifetime
     health
•    Significant reductions in carbon emissions from electricity generation and
     industrial processes - meaning less liability to purchase carbon credits offshore
•    Less dependence on fossil fuels imports and security from global price instability



The problems we’re solving

Market design that drives prices up and investment down
The current design of our market incentivises low investment. It is designed to deliver
“just in time” investment to meet the needs of a steady-state economy. But we’re
supposed to be going through an energy transition, and much more will be needed.

Investors wait for prices to rise rather than building new capacity ahead of demand.
High and volatile prices in turn put off the sorts of investments in large-scale
commercial and industrial use that would help make it easier for generators to invest
in new capacity that would stabilise and lower prices. High and volatile wholesale
prices are in turn passed directly to consumers through retail bills; contributing to the
energy poverty many households face today..

It’s a vicious cycle that needs to be broken.



Lack of ambition for our future
Energy will be a critical building block of the new economy in years to come; whether
powering next generation public transport, AI implementation, primary processing
or new industries that haven’t yet been invented. Whatever the future looks like, it’s
clear that it will involve significant demand for renewable energy.




Opportunity Party   Energy                                                                  Page 2
The Government’s flagship reform programme Electrify NZ is a good start towards
a renewable future, but does not go nearly far enough. The recent announcement
of a new LNG terminal by 2027 also calls into question the current Government’s
commitment to their stated goal of doubling renewable generation by 2050.



Fragmented regulation and red tape
Multiple agencies operating under different statutory regimes oversee the energy
sector, leading to jurisdictional gaps, duplication, and missed opportunities for
coordination. The complexity and volume of regulatory requirements—spanning
network consents, pricing rules, connection standards, and disclosure obligations—
create barriers to entry for new generators and impose disproportionate compliance
burdens on smaller distributors. Frontier Economics found that this regulatory
fragmentation “no longer fits the purpose” of a converged energy system and creates
risk of “unintended consequences concentrated in areas of gaps,” while stakeholders
report that overlapping rules on distribution pricing, connection processes, and
demand response have created confusion and delayed critical infrastructure
investment.



The Abundant Energy policy pillars

1.     Boost Renewable Generation
New Zealand’s current electricity system is not set up for the energy future Kiwis
deserve. Decarbonisation will sharply increase electricity demand, as will adding new
industries like data centres, high tech manufacturing and green hydrogen, electricity
demand could more than double..​

1.1  An Ambitious Long Term Strategy
Transpower’s “Accelerated Electrification” scenario envisages roughly 22 GW of
capacity by 2050. That may be just enough to meet core electrification needs and
muddle through decarbonisation. It is not enough to deliver energy abundance.​

Reaching a more ambitious target of 30GW renewable capacity by 2050 means
building around 19.2 GW of new renewable and storage capacity and retiring around
1.6 GW of coal and older gas plants. That means annually building and connecting
slightly more than the 556 MW added in 2024. More of what we’ve already been doing
- sustained and accelerated.

Most importantly, building large-scale renewable generation will require significant
private investment over an extended period. And that requires certainty - no more on-
again off-again pumped hydro or LNG terminals. That’s why we’ll work across parties
to lock in a 25-year Energy Strategy.




Opportunity Party   Energy                                                              Page 3
1.2 A New Zealand Capacity Investment Scheme
A capacity investment scheme modeled on that in Australia will use competitive
tenders to award long-term government contracts guarantee a minimum revenue for
new renewables and storage, while also sharing excess revenue with the government
above a “ceiling” wholesale price. The Australian scheme has already supported more
than 18GW of new generation and storage capacity and across its life will unlock more
than $70 billion of investment.

To avoid over-reliance on government price guarantees and maintain market
price signals, the Capacity Investment Scheme will apply to the second decade of
operation of new generation.This will provide the certainty necessary to kickstart
large-scale investment - especially in riskier prospects such as initial offshore wind
facilities and generation or storage capacity in constrained regions. To promote
greater competition in the generation market, initial tender rounds will be restricted
to new entrant generators.

1.3 Incentivising industrial-process electrification
In a mirror-image of the capacity investment scheme, existing large scale industrial
energy users can be incentivised to accelerate their switch to electricity through
awarding long-term government guarantees that the price will not exceed a certain
amount through competitive tenders. This will provide an initial increase in baseline
electricity demand that can be timed and structured to match initial generation
investments through the capacity investment scheme.



2. Make the market work for consumers
High power prices and ongoing reliance on fossil fuels don’t happen by accident. They
are the result of long-standing perverse incentives that mean we under-invest in
our energy infrastructure. We need to align the way our markets work to make sure
that our electricity generators, distributors and retailers are all working towards the
energy future we want to see.

2.1 Ringfencing government dividend revenue
Currently the single biggest beneficiary of high end-user energy prices is the
Government itself through the dividends it receives from its ownership stake in three
of the four big gentailers. That has meant that successive governments have been




Opportunity Party   Energy                                                                Page 4
incentivised not to modify the regulatory structures that give rise to these super-
profits. By ringfencing the proceeds of the Crown’s ownership of these assets we will
remove these incentives. That will also allow around $500 million per year to fund the
energy system transformation initiatives below.

2.2 A single regulator and permissive regulatory environment
Four different regulators, agencies, and ministries oversee energy, with overlapping
mandates and slow decision-making. This fragmentation causes inefficiency, delays,
and poor long-term planning. We will merge key functions of the Electricity Authority,
Commerce Commission (energy-related functions), MBIE energy policy, Energy
Efficiency and Conservation Authority (EECA) and relevant transport-electrification
functions into one modern energy regulator, and one Ministry of Energy.
A national policy statement on electricity generation and distribution will make it
easier for new generation and transmission infrastructure to obtain resource consent
and avoid subsequent litigation. This will include large grid-scale generation and
storage, generation for direct commercial use and smaller distributed infrastructure
in homes and communities.

2.3 Consolidation of distributors and reformed pricing rules
New Zealand’s 29 fragmented electricity distribution businesses (EDBs) —ranging
from Vector (600,000+ customers) to Buller Electricity (<5,000 customers)—lack
the scale to efficiently manage the investment required for decarbonisation. The
Commerce Commission’s “light-handed” regulation has constrained allowable capital
investments, while complex regulatory compliance burdens smaller distributors
disproportionately.

Consolidating management of the 29 electricity distributors into 6 - 8 larger firms will
give them the scale necessary to manage and invest in their infrastructure. Reformed
revenue rules for these newly consolidated distributors, as well as Transpower,
will free up substantial additional capital for grid upgrades and anticipatory grid
investment; building capacity before it is needed rather than in response to new
supply or demand.



3. Electrify houses, communities, and businesses
3.1   Adopt Rewiring Aotearoa’s low-interest electrification loans as part of a
      national Ratepayer Assistance Scheme administered by local government
The RAS builds on an established successful model used by councils to access credit
via the New Zealand Local Government Funding Agency (LGFA). Using the LGFA,
councils reduce borrowing costs while providing investors with a stable return on
investment. It is important to note that, because the loan is tied to the individual
rateable property and no one shareholder owns more than 20%, the debt from these
loans will not appear on the books of the councils, or central government.

3.2 Empower communities to take control of their energy futures:
An energy abundant future also means empowering our communities to have a
stake. This can mean local initiatives to generate, distribute or store electricity
as well as increase energy efficiency or make use of energy differently. In addition




Opportunity Party   Energy                                                                 Page 5
to the benefits of New Zealand citizens taking charge of their own energy future,
community-level energy initiatives help to increase the efficiency and resilience of
our overall energy system. Two funds will help directly support these local initiatives:

•     A community engagement fund will directly support activities where communities
      work together with electricity distributors to ensure local initiatives are
      accommodated and supported within the wider electricity grid
•     Government will directly co-invest in small-scale (up to 15 MW) community-
      owned generation and storage initiatives

3.3   Expand EECA’s Warmer Kiwi Homes programme to support solar
      generation and appliance electrification for low-income households
EECA has already been highly successful in delivering subsidised upgrades to
insulation and heating for large numbers of lower income households. But why not go
the whole way and at the same time upgrade appliances and install solar generation?
Doubling the current funding of the Warmer Kiwi Homes programme would enable it
to support the full electrification of those households that are unlikely to be able to
realise its benefits on their own.

3.4 Electrify urban public transport
Electrifying our urban bus fleet makes good sense with extensive new generation
capacity coming online. A fully funded mandate to Councils to electrify by 2030 will be
fully centrally funded, including both charging infrastructure and fleet assets.
In addition to significant decarbonisation and air pollution benefits, there are likely to
be spillover benefits to building to building out capacity to service electrified heavy
vehicle fleets; paving the way for electrifying other significant components of the
transport industry.

3.5 Encourage businesses to electrify their fleets
Electric vehicles make sense for business - they reduce ongoing fuel costs and
are more resilient to volatile global fuel prices. As intense users, businesses are
also well placed to benefit from the advantages over time of electric vehicle use.
The commercial fleet is also a significant portion of new vehicle purchases - with
commercial EVs will be sold in to the secondhand market. Accelerated depreciation
and fringe benefit tax exemptions for business electric vehicles worth up to $50,000
(or $75,000 for utes and vans) will encourage businesses to upgrade their fleets to
electric.




Opportunity Party   Energy                                                                   Page 6
Abundant Energy—Frequently Asked
Questions
How much will all this cost?
The operational expenditure for implementing this plan will all come from the
ringfenced dividend revenue from the Government’s ownership stake in the
gentailers; currently around $500 million annually. This will take this funding away
from core crown revenue, so represents a direct cost that will need to be funded
through other revenue sources; like the land value tax.

This dividend revenue will more than fund the costs associated with:

•    Administering lending to Councils for the ratepayer assistance scheme and low-
     interest electrification loans (approx. $6 million annually)
•    Administering the capacity investment scheme (approx. $5 million annually)
•    Direct support to communities and electricity distributors to work together to
     enable greater distributed generation (approx. $10 million annually)
•    Co-funding for small-scale community generation projects in isolated
     communities, and the grid infrastructure necessary to accommodate them (up to
     $100 million annually to support up to $2 billion of capital expenditure)
•    Warmer Kiwi Homes initiative expansion (approx. $80 million annually)
•    Mandated electrification of bus fleets (up to $125 million annually to support up
     to $2.5 billion of capital expenditure)

In addition to the above costs, the Capacity Investment Scheme will represent a
contingent liability on the Government balance sheet. While its expected value is
$0, as it is designed never to have to be paid out, this still presents a degree of risk if
power prices fall too dramatically.

What about grid stability?
The main source of grid stability in our proposal comes from overbuilding renewables;
having more renewable capacity available than current grid needs. This means that
variable renewable sources like wind and solar can be used ahead of hydro. Leaving
water in the hydro dams provides a reserve of highly responsive generation capacity.
Additional geothermal and hydro capacity will add to this.

Distributed generation generation and storage at household and community level
does not address broader “dry year” stability issues, but builds overall grid resilience
and could enable some peak shifting. Grid-scale storage further supports peak-
shifting.

Thermal generation at Huntly will still be available as a backup option; but it will be
used in true emergency scenarios, rather than as a routine part of the generation mix.

Why don’t you support structural separation of the gentailers?
Structural separation is a lengthy and costly solution, and doesn’t address the core
issues in the electricity sector. The fundamental problem is the perverse structural
incentives that give rise to underinvestment in generation across the board. The




Opportunity Party   Energy                                                                    Page 7
gentailers could undoubtedly do better, but they’re reasonably competitive with each
other at both the retail and generation ends of the market.

Do you support the current Government’s commitment to build a LNG import
terminal?
No. This locks us in to long-term reliance on imported LNG. In addition to the
environmental impacts, this puts us at the mercy of potentially volatile international
prices.

What about deep core geothermal or fusion energy?
These are great technologies and it’s great they’re being researched in New Zealand.
We’re fully in favour of continuing to support domestic research on these sorts
of technologies as part of a well-supported science and innovation ecosystem.
However, these are new technologies that haven’t yet been applied to reliable grid-
scale generation, so it wouldn’t be responsible to consider them as part of a planned
energy mix. However, initiatives like our capacity investment scheme allow for a
range of generation technologies - so if there’s a breakthrough, there’s no reason we
couldn’t take advantage of it.

How do you justify your claims of job creation, GDP growth and household
savings?

Modelling the impact of large-scale policies like these is necessarily difficult and
uncertain. We have taken a conservative approach to the claims we make and based
these on similar modelling by reputable bodies.


 Claim                          Key Assumption                           Justification
 Retail electricity prices of   The total figure represents a rough      Economic analysis by MBIE and Sense
 ~25c/kWh                       and conservative estimate based          Partners considered a hypothetical
                                on a ~25% reduction in generation        change in retail prices resulting from
                                costs of newly abundant renewable        greater hydro and gas supply of well
                                energy that are passed through           over 25%. The paper acknowledges
                                to consumers by a reasonably             that a similar change could result from
                                competitive electricity retail sector.   large scale adoption of new renewable
                                In addition we assume stable             generation.
                                distribution and transmission
                                costs and some “volume effect”           The Long Run Marginal Cost (LRMC) of
                                on networks; defraying the fixed         new utility-scale solar and wind in New
                                costs of network maintenance and         Zealand is estimated at $80–100/MWh
                                investment across a greater volume       (8–10c/kWh) wholesale.
                                of transmitted energy. We assume
                                retail margins per kWh remain            Distributed solar is estimated to have
                                unchanged.                               a direct levelized cost to consumers of
                                                                         12 - 16c/kWh.




Opportunity Party   Energy                                                                                  Page 8
 Claim                       Key Assumption                             Justification
 5000 high-skilled jobs      8 jobs per MW of capacity installed.       Research from international economic
 created during 30 year      19000 MW of capacity installed             research service BBVA research puts
 build-out phase             is 152,000 job years or 5,000 jobs         the job impact of solar installation at 10
                             sustained for the 30 year period.          - 14 jobs per MW and wind at 12 - 15. We
                                                                        have assumed a lower figure based on
                                                                        larger project scale.

                                                                        These estimates do not include
                                                                        additional jobs created by accelerated
                                                                        investment in grid upgrades.
 0.5%+ annual GDP growth     Capital expenditure of ~$45 billion on     The Electricity Authority estimates $30
 during build-out phase      grid assets with a multiplier of 1.5x is   billion of investment is required in the
                             an annual GDP contribution of ~$2.25       grid. Renewable generation capacity
                             billion or 0.51% of Sept 2025 GDP of       is likely to mean around a further $60
                             ~$440 billion                              billion of capital expenditure based on
                                                                        a range of capital cost estimates from
                                                                        around $1.5m/MW (utility-scale solar)
                                                                        to ~$6m/MW (offshore wind).

                                                                        We assume only half of this will be
                                                                        “new” investment as compared to that
                                                                        currently planned.

                                                                        Treasury estimates a cumulative
                                                                        multiplier from government spending of
                                                                        2.0 - 2.7. We assume a lower multiplier
                                                                        from a mix of public and private
                                                                        expenditure.
 0.35%+ permanent GDP        This figure is based on conservative       Economic analysis by MBIE and Sense
 growth                      estimates of enhanced economic             Partners estimated that 35% lower
                             activity as a result of cheaper power      energy prices in the period 2017-
                             (0.1%+ GDP growth), household              2025 would have lifted annual real
                             savings redirected towards domestic        GDP growth by 0.15 - 0.2%. A more
                             consumption (0.2%) and averted             conservative estimate based on only
                             losses from potential future energy        25% price reductions suggests 0.1-
                             crisis events (~0.05% GDP per dry          0.15% annual GDP.
                             year event).
                                                                        BERL modelling shows a $500–700
                                                                        million electricity cost reduction
                                                                        generates 0.2% higher GDP. Rewiring
                                                                        Aotearoa estimates suggest this is an
                                                                        extremely conservative estimate of the
                                                                        savings at stake.

                                                                        The 2024 energy crisis was estimated
                                                                        to cost the economy $300 million alone.




Opportunity Party   Energy                                                                                   Page 9
 Claim                          Key Assumption                          Justification
 Direct household electricity   This estimate is based on a price       Powerswitch estimates (based on
 cost saving of $600 for the    reduction from ~34c/kWh to ~25c/        MBIE data) that the average household
 average household              kWh (described above). Based on the     spends approximately $2343 annually
                                power consumption of the average        on electricity.
                                New Zealand household this would
                                mean a direct saving of ~$600.
 Further household energy       This is based on a combination of       This is a midpoint of Rewiring Aotearoa
 savings of $2,700+ from        household consumption reduction         estimates from $1,500 to $4,500.
 EVs, solar and appliance       as a result of converting to an EV as
 electrification                well as electric appliances and solar
                                generation.




Opportunity Party   Energy                                                                                Page 10
