Establishing a Special Economic Zone at Marsden Point - New Zealand First

 back to main page

 Our Policy 

 Establishing a Special Economic Zone at Marsden Point

 We are going to establish a Special Economic Zone at Marsden Point.

 We are going to establish a Special Economic Zone at Marsden Point.

Special Economic Zones are part of a wider strategic plan: producing more goods and services for export while fortifying our national security. 

In countries that have SEZs the policy mix varies, but include a combination of tax breaks, wage subsidies, reduced regulation, and investment in physical, transport or communications infrastructure. 

Our Special Economic Zone at Marsden Point would include the former refinery and Northport. The Zone would be focussed on energy generation/distribution and maritime activities, including the new DryDock, servicing ship repairs from New Zealand and around the world.

The principal benefit this economic zone would provide is relief from planning regulations and the RMA. 

No longer will industries in the zone have to deal with local/regional councils, DOC and a myriad of other bureaucratic agencies for their activities. 

Instead, planning rules, RMA consents and the like would be determined quickly by a government panel. This expert panel would make decisions based on whether the changes will grow the economy and achieve the aims of the zone. 

Other relief options we are considering are changes to the Overseas Investment Act to make it easier for quality foreign investment in the zone to occur while at the same time protecting our national interest and ownership.

Afterall, who wants another Darwin, where that port in Australia is owned by foreign interests? 

Additionally, tax incentives will be considered. These options will range from rates rebates (Crown would pay the local councils for services provided to Zone businesses), foregoing various levies, investment incentives, right up to reduced company taxes for specific investments 

The SEZ at Marsden Point is not just about legislation. It is also about a new complex arising from government policy and investment. Alongside the SEZ we have the Drydock, the Northland Expressway and the Marsden Point rail link, going North to Oteria, and South to Auckland.