Returning 50% of mining royalties to the regions - New Zealand First

 back to main page

 Our Policy 

 Returning 50% of mining royalties to the regions

 New Zealand First has announced its campaign policy that will see 50% of any royalties gained from mining to be directly returned to the region from which it came – not Wellington.

 New Zealand First has announced its campaign policy that will see 50% of any royalties gained from mining to be directly returned to the region from which it came – not Wellington.

This is part of a national mining policy package to restore common sense to the sector, deliver real returns to the regions, and unlock the economic potential New Zealand has been sitting on for far too long.

The policy package recognises the vital role mining plays in New Zealand’s economy and regional communities.

Mining is one of our most productive sectors. It contributes billions to our economy, supports thousands of jobs, and drives real growth without fuelling inflation.

This is about mining smarter, adding value here in New Zealand, and making sure the benefits flow directly back to our regions.

New Zealand’s mining industry is burgeoning, and we need to get ahead of its expansion to ensure we are building up our regions’ wealth, infrastructure, and future potential.

A core part of the policy is ensuring communities directly benefit from mining activity. 

If mining happens in a region, a 50% share of the royalties will stay in that region, supporting local infrastructure, services, and long-term development. 

It will be invested in water services, flood protection, energy generation opportunities, tourism opportunities, transport and connectivity upgrades, enabling housing development in areas of high minerals industry growth, and critical infrastructure projects.

We will back that up with targeted, regional investment to allow these projects to succeed, and will ensure our Mines Rescue capability is properly funded.

The policy package also takes aim at a system that has become overly complex.

We have duplication, delay, and rules that don’t improve environmental outcomes but do a very good job of stopping investment and costing jobs. We are putting a stop to that.

New mining zones will have clearer rules around where mining can occur, recognising regions where mining is already a key part of the economy.

Mining in the right places, with the right rules, will give businesses the confidence to invest for the long term and continue creating jobs in regions that rely on mining.

And to complement this, the duration of mining permits needs to reflect the maturity of the sector. We will do that by providing longer permits that creates more certainty. More confidence. And more investment.

The policy package will also rein in the role of government agencies, including the Department of Conservation.

They have a job to do, but they need to stay focused on their core priorities. Regional prosperity cannot continue to be sidelined by processes that have lost all sense of proportion.

You can protect the environment and grow the economy at the same time. They are not mutually exclusive.

New Zealand First’s mining plan will help to further unlock New Zealand’s resource potential. 

Right now, we don’t even have a modern understanding of what we’ve got beneath our feet. Other countries do and that’s simply not good enough.

So we will deliver a modern geological survey and unlock existing data through investment in advanced core-scanning technology. Because if you don’t know what you have, you can’t make smart decisions about unlocking its full potential.

We also want more value created here in New Zealand from our critical minerals. At the moment, we risk being stuck in a ‘dig and ship’ model for key future industries, sending our resources offshore and letting others make the real money.

As a result, the policy package includes continuing to invest in science and innovation and rebuild the workforce needed to support the sector.

We will reopen the School of Mines and invest in skills and training so New Zealanders can take up the high-paying jobs this industry creates.

This policy package will deliver much-needed certainty for investors.

The length of permits need to reflect that mining is a long-term business, giving investors certainty and ensuring permits cover the full life of the mine, including rehabilitation.

The New Zealand First mining policy package is ultimately about creating growth and opportunity for everyday kiwis and building on major policies we’ve already announced like Fast-track.

This is about ensuring our regional communities and wider New Zealand thrives, with mining as part of the engine.

It’s about backing a responsible, modern industry and making sure it is continued to be recognised for what it is - a vital part of this region’s economy, and a key part of New Zealand’s future.