Party drug MDMA gets official approval as PTSD treatment | RNZ
Skip to main content

4 September 2026, 12:57pm

Party drug MDMA gets official approval as PTSD treatment
RNZ Digital reporters

Kate Green

Caption:MDMA is a synthetic psychoactive drug used recreationally, often called 'ecstasy', 'E' or 'molly'.Photo credit:123RF
Two New Zealand psychiatrists have been approved by MedSafe to prescribe and administer MDMA for the treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder.

MDMA is a synthetic psychoactive drug used recreationally, often called 'ecstasy', 'E' or 'molly'.

It is the first time Medsafe has granted approvals for this type of therapy.

Until now, MDMA-assisted therapy for PTSD has not been available as a treatment option in New Zealand. Australia became the first country to allow authorised psychiatrists to prescribe MDMA for PTSD in July 2023.

The two psychiatrists with approval are Wellington's Dr Gary Wynn and Auckland's Dr Tom Paterson. The pair spent more than a year working through the regulatory process, they said in a statement.

Wynn specialises in PTSD and trauma, and Paterson in addiction.

Wynn, who had more than 20 years' experience, explained the drug was often referred to as an empathogen - a kind of psychoactive drug which increases empathy, emotional openness, and connectedness towards others.

"In therapy, that really allows someone who's been traumatized to connect to their therapist, to feel safe, and to get into the heavy work of the traumas that they've experienced in their life in a much safer environment facilitated by the drug.

"The same thing does happen over many years of therapy," he said. "You can get there over many years. This sort of accelerates that into a very short period of time because of the effect of the drug."

But the projected cost of the therapy could reduce the number of people who had access.

Each round of treatment was expected to cost about $15,000. A standard course would be three rounds, totalling 54 hours of therapy. No public funding has yet been allocated.

Associate Health Minister David Seymour said MDMA "can be very effective at treating [PTSD] through psychedelic-assisted therapy".

Associate Health Minister David Seymour.
RNZ / Nathan McKinnon

"Recent changes have put New Zealand's settings in line with Australia, where authorised prescribers have been providing MDMA-assisted psychotherapy for PTSD in clinical settings for some time.

"MDMA remains an unapproved medicine, but two experienced psychiatrists have already been granted authority to prescribe it to patients with PTSD.

"This is very good news for their patients, who will have been suffering for some time."

He said there would be safeguards in place to ensure it was prescribed safely.

"Treatment with MDMA occurs as part of a comprehensive treatment plan and occurs in the prescriber's clinic. Patients don't get dispensed MDMA to take home.

"Practitioners must also meet a series of requirements to gain approval, including demonstrating expertise in the area and providing a detailed proposal of how they will administer the treatment."

A trial completed in 2023 found MDMA-assisted therapy significantly reduced symptoms in people with moderate to severe PTSD, compared to those who received a placebo. There were no serious adverse effects or deaths in the 104 patients who took part.

What does a therapy session with MDMA look like?

Wynn said a standard dose of MDMA would last between four and six hours, so a therapy session could take a whole day.

"You come in and you meet beforehand and you talk and you sort of get the person into the right frame of mind. You might do some yoga, you might do some meditation, you might do some music or arts.

"You want to get the person really in the right headspace as they enter that space that they can really connect with the therapist, feel safe and explore the bounds of the traumas that they've experienced."

What are the risks?

Usually, the risk associated with MDMA use came from overdose - but in a clinical setting, the dose was carefully measured.

"We're talking 120, 160 milligrams of MDMA during a dosing session," Wynn said.

According to scientific literature, that was on par with what people took recreationally - perhaps a little less.

"Everything has risks," Wynn said - but in this case, they were "very minor".

The usual side effect warnings printed on the back of even the most common medicines would also apply - the potential for elevated heart rate, sweating, dizziness, headache and nausea.

"You can experience all of that, but it tends to be temporary and pass quite quickly."

When it came to longer-term effects, the therapy itself was more likely to leave a mark.

"If you bring up your trauma and you don't process it well, if you can have sort of this residual effects for a period of time afterwards until you integrate it. So it can destabilise someone temporarily, but that's actually can be good... because we can then work on that trauma together."

Have any patients expressed an interest already?

Wynn said he had deliberately kept the option off the table until the application was approved. Now, he expected a lot of people to come out of the woodwork.

Anywhere from 1 to 5 percent of the population would experience PTSD during their life.

"There are a lot of people who are really desperate feeling about their PTSD," Wynn said. "You know, they've gone to therapy, they've done meds, nothing works."

But this option would likely only be accessible for a small number for patients.

"It's expensive, intensive, and takes quite a bit of time to do properly. So I think there's going to be a lot of interest. Who can actually spend the time and the money or get the support to do it? It's going to be a question that shakes out over the coming months."

The Ministry of Health said in a statement the decision brought New Zealand into line with Australia, where authorised psychiatrists had been able to provide MDMA-assisted psychotherapy for PTSD since 2023.

"While MDMA contains the same active ingredient found in the illicit drug commonly known as ecstasy, the product used in treatment is manufactured to a pharmaceutical standard and used under strict clinical supervision."

Patients must be over 18 and undergo a comprehensive clinical assessment before treatment was considered.

"Any other clinician wishing to prescribe MDMA would require their own approval from Medsafe."

4 September 2026, 12:57pm

Related stories
MDMA: Australia begins world-first psychedelic therapy

Palliative doctors call for research into psychedelic drugs for treatment

Call for more medical access to commonly used illicit drugs

White powder thought to be MDMA revealed as toxic chemical

Pair arrested after MDMA, ketamine found during search in Blenheim

More Health
View all Health articles
The psychiatrist who can now prescribe MDMA

Gareth Lowndes calls for HDC overhaul after delayed report into mother’s death at Middlemore Hospital

Meningitis Foundation calls for bipartisan support for free adolescent vaccination programme

Second patient in two months found dead in Waikato Hospital toilet

More News
View RNZ homepage
The Lindsay Clancy case looks tragically like NZ's Lauren Dickason trial. Here's where they differ.

Qantas flight diverted to Christchurch after 'engine issue'

Chinese national rescued from Nepal tunnel a day after 2 Nepalis pulled out alive

Live: All Blacks v South Africa - Rugby's Greatest Rivalry tour