What we've delivered for you | National Party

HomeOur Plan
Our Plan

By sticking to National's plan there will be a more secure future for all New Zealanders.
EconomyNo New TaxesLaw & OrderEducation & Health

When National came into government two years ago, Labour had left a country that was in deep trouble. The future did not look bright for Kiwis. The economy was damaged - inflation was at a 32 year high, mortgage repayments had skyrocketed, wages had stagnated, there were hundreds of ram raids a year, violent crime was rising, there was more welfare dependency, and children's achievement was plummeting. National has a long-term plan to turn that around.

National is fixing the basics and building the future by:

Growing the economy
1. Growing the economy to create jobs and boost wages.
We’re growing the economy through:

2.7%
New Zealand’s economy is set to grow on average 2.7% a year for the next four years, creating 220,000 jobs, and wages are expected to grow faster than inflation. 

$6 billion
Forecast Government borrowing has reduced by $6 billion, and New Zealand is on track to return to surplus in 2028/29. 

Disciplined spending, reducing wasteful spending, lowering debt
Reducing the size of the public sector
Trade deals like the Free Trade Agreement with India
A 30-year infrastructure pipeline and started work on four Roads of National Significance
Building the roads, schools, hospitals New Zealand needs for the future
Accelerating renewable energy and back up generation projects to improve New Zealand’s energy security and lower your bills.

no new taxes
2. No new taxes so you keep more of what you earn.
Our promise of no new taxes reflects our strong economic management, underpinned by:

14 Years
For the first time in 14 years we delivered tax relief to hard working Kiwis because you deserve to keep more of what you earn.

0 new taxes
We will not introduce any new taxes. 

Disciplined spending
Reducing wasteful spending
Lowering debt.
Put simply, through diligent economic management we do not need to raise your taxes to invest in the frontline services you rely or to meet any of our spending commitments.

Staying tough on crime
3. Staying tough on crime to keep our streets safer.
Our approach to restoring law and order has seen an 85% reduction in ram raids and 37,000 fewer victims of violent crime.
We’re staying tough on crime through:

85%
Under National’s approach to law and order there has been an 85% reduction in ram raids. 

37,000
Restoring consequences for crime has also delivered 37,000 fewer victims of violent crime. 

Tougher sentences for criminals
Cracking down on gangs
More tools and powers for Police
More Police foot patrols.

Improving education and health
4. Improving education and health
so kids are taught the basics brilliantly and you get care when you need it.
We’re further improving education through:

1 hour
We’ve introduced one hour per day of reading, writing and maths, banned cell phones in classrooms and invested in classroom resources. 

43%
Of new entrants are now exceeding at reading and kids making 12 months maths progress in just 12 weeks.

More maths, reading and writing resources
 A new national qualification to replace NCEA.

We’re further improving health through:

40,000
Elective procedures delivered under Elective Boost, maximising capacity across public and private healthcare so Kiwis receive procedures sooner. 

66 new medicines
We’ve delivered 66 new medicines, including 33 cancer treatments. 

Three three-day post-natal stays so new mums can get the support they need
More palliative care centres for seriously ill children
More funding for medicines
Lowering the bowel screening age to 56 so more Kiwis can get screened.

By sticking to our plan there will be a more secure future for all New Zealanders.

THE ALTERNATIVEA broken economy with higher debt, higher spending and at least nine new taxes that you will pay. Labour spent up large in government, racked up $120 billion more in debt and kept taxes high with nothing to show for it. It is proposing the same mistakes again and Kiwis will be left paying the price for years to come.

2026 Election
2026 Election Policies

All policies
Tax
No new taxes under National
Read more
Economy
Kiwisaver
Read more
Economy
Modernising Paid Parental Leave
Read more
Economy
National's Budget Responsibility Rules
Read more
Economy
Home Energy Fund
Read more
Economy
National to make it easier to build the future
Read more
Economy
New Zealand's Next Billion Customers
Read more
Economy
National backs South Island growth
Read more
More
Hunting and Fishing
Read more
Law & Order
Modernise Sexual Consent Laws
Read more
Law & Order
Tougher Sentences for Sexual Offending
Read more
Economy
Back Pocket Boost for Graduates
Read more

All policies